There are various kinds of knowledge: knowing how to do something (for example, how to ride a bicycle), knowing someone in person, and knowing a place or a city. Although such knowledge is of epistemological interest as well, we shall focus on knowledge of propositions and refer to such knowledge using the schema S knows that p, where S stands for the subject who has knowledge and p for the proposition that is known. Our question will be: What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for S to know that p? We may distinguish, broadly, between a traditional and a non-traditional approach to answering this question. We shall refer to them as TK and NTK.

According to TK, knowledge that p is, at least approximately, justified true belief (JTB). False propositions cannot be known. Therefore, knowledge requires truth. A proposition S doesn't even believe can't be a proposition that S knows. Therefore, knowledge requires belief. Finally, S's being correct in believing that p might merely be a matter of luck. Therefore, knowledge requires a third element, traditionally identified as justification. Thus we arrive at a tripartite analysis of knowledge as JTB: S knows that p if and only if p is true and S is justified in believing that p. According to this analysis, the three conditions — truth, belief, and justification — are individually necessary and jointly sufficient for knowledge.

Initially, we may say that the role of justification is to ensure that S's belief is not true merely because of luck. On that, TK and NTK are in agreement. They diverge, however, as soon as we proceed to be more specific about exactly how justification is to fulfill this role. According to TK, S's belief that p is true not merely because of luck when it is reasonable or rational, from S's own point of view, to take p to be true. According to evidentialism, what makes a belief justified in this sense is the possession of evidence. The basic idea is that a belief is justified to the degree it fits S's evidence. NTK, on the other hand, conceives of the role of justification differently. Its job is to ensure that S's belief has a high objective probability of truth and therefore, if true, is not true merely because of luck. One prominent idea is that this is accomplished if, and only if, a belief originates in reliable cognitive processes or faculties. This view is known as reliabilism.

The tripartite analysis of knowledge as JTB has been shown to be incomplete. There are cases of JTB that do not qualify as cases of knowledge. JTB, therefore, is not sufficient for knowledge. Cases like that — known as Gettier-cases — arise because neither the possession of evidence nor origination in reliable faculties is sufficient for ensuring that a belief is not true merely because of luck. Consider the well-known case of barn-facades: Henry drives through a rural area in which what appear to be barns are, with the exception of just one, mere barn facades. From the road Henry is driving on, these facades look exactly like real barns. Henry happens to be looking at the one and only real barn in the area and believes that there's a barn over there. Henry's belief is justified, according to TK, because Henry's visual experience justifies his belief. According to NTK, his belief is justified because Henry's belief originates in a reliable cognitive process: vision. Yet Henry's belief is plausibly viewed as being true merely because of luck. Had Henry noticed one of the barn-facades instead, he would also have believed that there's a barn over there. There is, therefore, broad agreement among epistemologists that Henry's belief does not qualify as knowledge.

To state conditions that are jointly sufficient for knowledge, what further element must be added to JTB? This is known as the Gettier problem. According to TK, solving the problem requires a fourth condition. According to some NTK theorists, it calls for refining the concept of reliability. For example, if reliability could suitably be indexed to the subject's environment, reliabilists could say that Henry's belief is not justified because in his environment, vision is not reliable when it comes to discerning barns from barn-facades.

Some NTK theorists bypass the justification condition altogether. They would say that, if we conceive of knowledge as reliably produced true belief, there is no need for justification. Reliabilism, then, comes in two forms: as a theory of justification or as a theory of knowledge. As the former, it views justification to be an important ingredient of knowledge but, unlike TK, grounds justification solely in reliability. As a theory of knowledge, reliabilism asserts that justification is not necessary for knowledge; rather, reliably produced true belief (provided the notion of reliability is suitably refined to rule out Gettier cases) is sufficient for it.

When we discuss the nature of justification, we must distinguish between two different issues: First, what do we mean when we use the word justification? Second, what makes beliefs justified? It is important to keep these issues apart because a disagreement on how to answer the second question will be a mere verbal dispute, if the disagreeing parties have different concepts of justification in mind. So let us first consider what we might mean by justification and then move on to the non-definitional issues.

How is the term justification used in ordinary language? Here is an example: Tom asked Martha a question, and Martha responded with a lie. Was she justified in lying? Jane thinks she was, for Tom's question was an inappropriate one, the answer to which was none of Tom's business. What might Jane mean when she thinks that Martha was justified in responding with a lie? A natural answer is this: She means that Martha was under no obligation to refrain from lying. Due the inappropriateness of Tom's question, it wasn't Martha's duty to tell the truth. This understanding of justification, commonly labeled deontological, may be defined as follows: S is justified in doing x if and only if S is not obliged to refrain from doing x.

Suppose, when we apply the word justification not to actions but to beliefs, we mean something analogous. In that case, the term justification as used in epistemology would have to be defined this way:

Deontological Justification (DJ)
S is justified in believing that p if and only if S believes that p while it is not the case that S is obliged to refrain from believing that p.
What kind of obligations are relevant when we wish to assess whether a belief, rather than an action, is justified or unjustified? Whereas when we evaluate an action, we are interested in assessing the action from either a moral or a prudential point of view, when it comes to beliefs, what matters is the pursuit of truth. The relevant kinds of obligations, then, are those that arise when we aim at having true beliefs. Exactly what, though, must we do in the pursuit of this aim? According to one answer, the one favored by evidentialists, we ought to believe in accord with our evidence. For this answer to be helpful, we need an account of what our evidence consists of. According to another answer, we ought to follow the correct epistemic norms. If this answer is going to help us figure out what obligations the truth-aim imposes on us, we need to be given an account of what the correct epistemic norms are.

The deontological understanding of the concept of justification is common to the way philosophers such as Descartes, Locke, Moore and Chisholm have thought about justification. Today, however, the dominant view is that the deontological understanding of justification is unsuitable for the purposes of epistemology. Two chief objections have been raised against conceiving of justification deontologically. First, it has been argued that DJ presupposes that we can have a sufficiently high degree of control over our beliefs. But beliefs are akin not to actions but rather things such as digestive processes, sneezes, or involuntary blinkings of the eye. The idea is that beliefs simply arise in or happen to us. Therefore, beliefs are not suitable for deontological evaluation. To this objection, some advocates of DJ have replied that lack of control over our beliefs is no obstacle to using the term justification in its deontological sense. Others have argued that it's a mistake to think that we can control our beliefs any less than our actions.

According to the second objection to DJ, deontological justification does not tend to epistemize true beliefs: it does not tend to make them non-accidentally true. This claim is typically supported by describing cases involving either a benighted, culturally isolated society or subjects who are cognitively deficient. Such cases involve beliefs that are claimed to be epistemically defective even though it would not seem that the subjects in these cases are under any obligation to refrain from believing as they do. What makes the beliefs in question epistemically defective is that they are formed using unreliable and intellectually faulty methods. The reason why the subjects, from their own point of view, are not obliged to believe otherwise is that they are either cognitively deficient or live in a benighted and isolated community. DJ says that such beliefs are justified. If they meet the remaining necessary conditions, DJ-theorists would have to count them as knowledge. According to the objection, however, the beliefs in question, even if true, could not possibly qualify as knowledge, due to the epistemically defective way they were formed. Consequently, DJ must be rejected.

Those who reject DJ use the term justification in a technical sense that deviates from how the word is ordinarily used. The technical sense is meant to make the term suitable for the needs of epistemology. But how are we then to conceive of justification? What does it mean for a belief to be justified in a non-deontological sense? Recall that the role assigned to justification is that of ensuring that a true belief isn't true merely by accident. Let us say that this is accomplished when a true belief instantiates the property of proper probabilification. We may, then, define non-deontological justification as follows:

Non-Deontological Justification (NDJ)
S is justified in believing that p if and only if S believes that p on a basis that properly probabilifies S's belief that p.
If we wish to pin down exactly what probabilification amounts to, we will have to deal with a variety of tricky issues. For now, let us just focus on the main point. Those who prefer NDJ to DJ would say that probabilification and deontological justification can diverge: it's possible for a belief to be deontologically justified without being properly probabilified. This is just what cases involving benighted cultures or cognitively deficient subjects are supposed to show.

What makes justified beliefs justified? According to evidentialists, it is the possession of evidence. What is it, though, to possess evidence for believing that p? Some evidentialists would say it is to be in a mental state that represents p as being true. For example, if the coffee in your cup tastes sweet to you, then you have evidence for believing that the coffee is sweet. If you feel a throbbing pain in your head, you have evidence for believing that you have a headache. If you have a memory of having had cereal for breakfast, then you have evidence for a belief about the past: a belief about what you ate when you had breakfast. And when you clearly see or intuit that the proposition If Jack had more than four cups of coffee, then Jack had more than three cups of coffee is true, then you have evidence for believing that proposition. In this view, evidence consists of perceptual, introspective, memorial, and intuitional experiences, and to possess evidence is to have an experience of that kind. So according to this evidentialism, what makes you justified in believing that p is your having an experience that represents p as being true.

Many reliabilists, too, would say that the experiences mentioned in the previous paragraph matter. However, they would deny that justification is solely a matter of having suitable experiences. Rather, they hold that a belief is justified if, and only if, it results from cognitive origin that is reliable: an origin that tends to produce true beliefs and therefore properly probabilifies the belief. Reliabilists, then, would agree that the beliefs mentioned in the previous paragraph are justified. But according to a standard form of reliabilism, what makes them justified is not the possession of evidence, but the fact that the types of processes in which they originate — perception, introspection, memory, and rational intuition — are reliable.

In contemporary epistemology, there has been an extensive debate on whether justification is internal or external. Internalists claim that it is internal; externalists deny it. How are we to understand these claims?

To understand what the internal-external distinction amounts to, we need to bear in mind that, when a belief is justified, there is something that makes it justified. Likewise, if a belief is unjustified, there is something that makes it unjustified. Let's call the things that make a belief justified or unjustified J-factors. The dispute over whether justification is internal or external is a dispute about what the J-factors are.

Among those who think that justification is internal, there is no unanimity on how to understand the concept of internality. We can distinguish between two approaches. According to the first, justification is internal because we enjoy a special kind of access to J-factors: they are always recognizable on reflection. Hence, assuming certain further premises (which will be mentioned momentarily), justification itself is always recognizable on reflection. According to the second approach, justification is internal because J-factors are always mental states. Let's call the former accessibility internalism and the latter mentalist internalism. Externalists deny that J-factors meet either one of these conditions.

Evidentialism is typically associated with internalism, and reliabilism with externalism. Let us see why. Evidentialism says, at a minimum, two things:

E1 Whether one is justified in believing p depends on one's evidence regarding p.
E2 One's evidence consists of one's mental states.
By virtue of E2, evidentialism is obviously an instance of mentalist internalism.

Luminosity
One's own mind is cognitively luminous: Relying on introspection, one can always recognize on reflection what mental states one is in.
Necessity
a priori recognizable, necessary principles say what is evidence for what. Relying on a priori insight, one can therefore always recognize on reflection whether one's mental states are evidence for p.

Although E1 and E2 by themselves do not imply access internalism, it is quite plausible to maintain that evidentialism, when embellished with Luminosity and Necessity, becomes an instance of access internalism.

Next, let us consider why reliabilism is an externalist theory. Reliabilism says that the justification of one's beliefs is a function of, not one's evidence, but the reliability of one's belief sources such as memorial, perceptual and introspective states and processes. Whereas the sources might qualify as mental, their reliability does not. Therefore, reliabilists reject mentalist internalism. Moreover, if the justification of one's beliefs is determined by the reliability of one's belief sources, justification will not always be recognizable on reflection. Hence reliabilists reject access internalism as well.

Let's use an example of radical deception to illustrate the difference between evidentialism as an internalist theory and reliabilism as an externalist theory. If evidentialism is true, a subject who is radically deceived will be mislead about what is actually the case, but not about what he is justified in believing. If, on the other hand, reliabilism is true, then such a subject will be misled about both what is actually the case and what he is justified in believing. Let us see why.

Distinguish between Tim and Tim*: one and the same person whom we imagine in two altogether different situations. Tim's situation is normal, like yours or mine. Tim*, however, is a brain in a vat. Suppose a mad scientist abducted and envatted Tim* by removing his brain from his skull and putting it in a vat in which his brain is kept alive. Next, the mad scientist connects the nerve endings of Tim*'s brain with wires to a machine that, controlled by a powerful computer, starts stimulating Tim*'s brain in such a way that Tim* does not notice what actually happened to him. He is going to have perfectly ordinary experiences, just like Tim. Indeed, let's assume that the mental states of Tim and the mental states of Tim* are alike. But, since Tim* is a brain in a vat, he is, unlike Tim, radically deceived about his actual situation. For example, when Tim believes he has hands, he is right. When Tim* believes he has hands, he is mistaken. (His hands were discarded, along with the rest of his limbs and torso.) When Tim believes he is drinking coffee, he is right. When Tim* believes he is drinking coffee, he is mistaken. (Brains don't drink coffee.) Now suppose Tim* asks himself whether he is justified in believing that he has hands. Since Tim* is just like Tim, Tim* will say that his belief is justified, just as Tim would if he were to ask himself whether he is justified in believing that he has hands. Evidentialism implies that Tim*'s answer is correct. For even though he is deceived about his external situation, he is not deceived about his evidence: the way things appear to him in his experiences. This illustrates the internality of evidentialist justification. Reliabilism, on the other hand, suggests that Tim*'s answer is incorrect. Tim*'s belief that he has hands originates in cognitive processes — seeing and feeling his (nonexisting) hands — that now yield virtually no true beliefs. To the extent that this implies their unreliability, the resulting beliefs are unjustified. Consequently, he is deceived not only about his external situation (his not having hands), but also about the justificational status of his belief that he has hands. This illustrates the externality of reliabilist justification.

The example of Tim and Tim* may serve as well to illustrate a further way in which we may conceive of the difference between internalism and externalism. Some internalists take the following principle to be characteristic of the internalist point of view:

Mentalism
If two subjects, S and S*, are alike mentally, then the justificational status of their beliefs is alike as well: the same beliefs are justified or unjustified for them to the same extent.
When we apply this principle to the Tim/Tim* example, it tells us that evidentialism is an internalist and reliabilism an externalist theory. Even though there are significant physical differences between Tim and Tim*, mentally they are alike. Evidentialism implies that, since Tim and Tim* are mentally alike, they have the same evidence, and thus are justificationally alike as well. For example, they are both justified in believing that they have hands. This makes evidentialism an internalist theory. Reliabilism, on the other hand, allows that, even though Tim and Tim* are mentally alike, they differ justificationally, since Tim's beliefs are (by and large) produced by reliable cognitive faculties, whereas the faculties that produce Tim*'s beliefs may count as unreliable. For example, some versions of reliabilism imply that Tim is justified in believing that he has hands, whereas Tim* is not. This makes reliabilism an externalist theory.

Why think that justification is internal? One argument for the internality of justification goes as follows: Justification is deontological: it is a matter of duty-fulfillment. But duty-fulfillment is internal. Therefore, justification is internal. Another argument appeals to the brain-in-the-vat scenario we considered above: Tim*'s belief that he has hands is justified in the way that Tim's is justifed. Tim* is internally the same as Tim and externally quite different. Therefore, internal factors are what justify beliefs. Finally, since justification resulting from the possession of evidence is internal justification, internalism can be supported by way of making a case for evidentialism. What, then, can be said in support of evidentialism? Evidentialists would appeal to cases in which a belief is reliably formed but not accompanied by any experiences that would qualify as evidence. They would say that it's not plausible to claim that, in cases like that, the subject's belief is justified. Hence such cases show, according to evidentialists, that a belief can't be justified unless it's supported by evidence.

Why think that justification is external? To begin with, externalists about justification would point to the fact that animals and small children have knowledge and thus have justified beliefs. But their beliefs can't be justified in the way evidentialists conceive of justification. Therefore, we must conclude that the justification their beliefs enjoy is external: resulting not from the possession of evidence but from origination in reliable processes. And second, externalists would say that what we want from justification is the kind of objective probability needed for knowledge, and only external conditions on justification imply this probability. So justification has external conditions.

The debate over the structure of knowledge and justification is primarily one among those who hold that knowledge requires justification. From this point of view, the structure of knowledge derives from the structure of justification. We will, therefore, focus on the latter.

According to foundationalism, our justified beliefs are structured like a building: they are divided into a foundation and a superstructure, the latter resting upon the former. Beliefs belonging to the foundation are basic. Beliefs belonging to the superstructure are nonbasic and receive justification from the justified beliefs in the foundation.

For a foundationalist account of justification to be plausible, it must solve two problems. First, by virtue of exactly what are basic beliefs justified? Second, how do basic beliefs justify nonbasic beliefs? Before we address these questions, let us first consider the question of what it is that makes a justified belief basic in the first place. Once we have done that, we can then move on to discuss by virtue of what a basic belief might be justified, and how such a belief might justify a nonbasic belief.

According to one approach, what makes a justified belief basic is that it doesn't receive its justification from any other beliefs. The following definition captures this thought:

Doxastic Basicality (DB)
S's justified belief that p is basic if and only if S's belief that p is justified without owing its justification to any of S's other beliefs.
Let's consider what would, according to DB, qualify as an example of a basic belief. Suppose you notice (for whatever reason) someone's hat, and you also notice that that hat looks blue to you. So you believe

(B) It appears to me that that hat is blue.
Unless something very strange is going on, (B) is an example of a justified belief. DB tells us that (B) is basic if and only if it does not owe its justification to any other beliefs of yours. So if (B) is indeed basic, there might be some item or other to which (B) owes its justification, but that item would not be another belief of yours. We call this kind of basicality doxastic because it makes basicality a function of how your doxastic system (your belief system) is structured.

Let us turn to the question of where the justification that attaches to (B) might come from, if we think of basicality as defined by DB. Note that DB merely tells us how (B) is not justified. It says nothing about how (B) is justified. DB, therefore, does not answer that question. What we need, in addition to DB, is an account of what it is that justifies a belief such as (B). According to one strand of foundationalist thought, (B) is justified because it can't be false, doubted, or corrected by others. So (B) is justified because (B) carries with it an epistemic privilege such as infallibility, indubitability, or incorrigibility. The idea is that (B) is justified by virtue of its intrinsic nature, which makes it possess some kind of an epistemic privilege.

Note that (B) is not a belief about the hat. Rather, it's a belief about how the hat appears to you. So (B) is an introspective belief about a perceptual experience of yours. According to the thought we are considering here, a subject's basic beliefs are made up of introspective beliefs about the subject's own mental states, of which perceptual experiences make up one subset. Other mental states about which a subject can have basic beliefs include such things as having a headache, being tired, feeling pleasure, or having a desire for a cup of coffee. Beliefs about external objects do not and indeed cannot qualify as basic, for it is impossible for such beliefs to own the kind of epistemic privilege needed for the status of being basic.

According to a different version of foundationalism, (B) is justified not by virtue of possessing some kind of privileged status, but by some further mental state of yours. That mental state, however, is not a further belief of yours. Rather, it is the very perceptual experience that (B) is about: the hat's looking blue to you. Let (E) represent that experience. According to this alternative proposal, (B) and (E) are distinct mental states. The idea is that what justifies (B) is (E). Since (E) is an experience, not a belief of yours, (B) is, according to DB, basic.

Let's call the two versions of foundationalism we have distinguished privilege foundationalism and experiential foundationalism. Privilege foundationalism restricts basic beliefs to beliefs about one's own mental states. Experiential foundationalism is less restrictive. According to it, beliefs about external objects can be basic as well. Suppose instead of (B), you believe

(H) That hat is blue.
Unlike (B), (H) is about the hat itself, and not the way the hat appears to you. Such a belief is not one about which we are infallible or otherwise epistemically privileged. Privilege foundationalism would, therefore, classify (H) as nonbasic. It is, however, quite plausible to think that (E) justifies not only (B) but (H) as well. If (E) is indeed what justifies (H), and (H) does not receive any additional justification from any further beliefs of yours, then (H) qualifies, according to DB, as basic.

Experiential Foundationalism, then, combines to two crucial ideas: (i) when a justified belief is basic, its justification is not owed to any other belief; (ii) what in fact justifies basic beliefs are experiences.

Under ordinary circumstances, perceptual beliefs such as (H) are not based on any further beliefs about one's own perceptual experiences. It is unclear, therefore, how privilege foundationalism can account for the justification of ordinary perceptual beliefs like (H). Experiential foundationalism, on the other hand, has no trouble at all explaining how ordinary perceptual beliefs are justified: they are justified by the perceptual experiences that give rise to them. This could be viewed as a reason for preferring experiential foundationalism to privilege foundationalism.

Above, we noted that how to think of basicality is not uncontroversial. DB defines just one kind of basicality. Here's an alternative conception of it:

Epistemic Basicality (EB)
S's justified belief that p is basic if and only if S's justification for believing that p does not depend on any justification S possesses for believing a further proposition, q.
EB makes it more difficult for a belief to be basic than DB does. To see why, we turn to the chief question (let's call it the J-question) that advocates of experiential foundationalism face:

The J-Question
Why are perceptual experiences a source of justification?
One way of answering the J-question can be viewed as a compromise position, since it is meant to be a compromise between foundationalism and its competitor, coherentism. The compromise position will be of interest to us because it illustrates how DB and EB differ. For if we adopt the compromise position, beliefs such as (H) will qualify as basic according to DB, but according to EB as nonbasic. So let's see what the compromise position says.

From a coherentist point of view, we might answer the J-question as follows: Perceptual experiences are a source of justification because we are justified in believing them to be reliable. As we will see below, making perceptual justification dependent on the existence of reliability-attributing beliefs is quite problematic. There is, however, an alternative answer to the J-question that appeals to reliability without making perceptual justification dependent upon beliefs that attribute reliability to perceptual experiences. According to this second answer to the J-question, perceptual experiences are a source of justification because we have justification for taking them to be reliable. That's the view we shall call the compromise position.

Note that your having justification for believing that p doesn't entail that you actually believe p. For example, if you believe that the person next to you wears a blue hat, you have justification for believing that the person next to you wears a blue hat or a red hat. But of course you are unlikely to believe the latter even though you have justification for it. Likewise, your having justification for attributing reliability to your perceptual experiences doesn't entail that you have given thought to the matter and actually formed the belief that they are reliable. According to the kind of coherentism we considered above, if your perceptual experiences are a source of justification for you, it must be the case that you have considered the matter and believe them to be reliable. The compromise position says no such thing. It says merely that, if your perceptual experiences are a source of justification for you, you must have justification for believing them to be reliable.

What might give us justification for thinking that our perceptual experiences are reliable? That's a complicated issue. For our present purposes, let's consider the following answer: We remember that they have served us well in the past. We are supposing, then, that justification for attributing reliability to your perceptual experiences consists of memories of perceptual success. According to the compromise position, it is never a perceptual experience (E) by itself that justifies a perceptual belief, but only (E) in conjunction with suitable track-record memories that give you justification for considering (E) reliable. Let (E) again stand for the hat's looking blue to you, and (H) for your belief that that hat is blue. According to the compromise position, (E) justifies (H) only if (E) is accompanied by track-record memories (M) that give you justification for attributing reliability to your visual experiences. So what, according to the compromise position as we have described it, justifies (H) is the conjunction of (E) and (M).

We can now see how DB and EB differ. According to the compromise position, your having justification for (H) depends on your having justification for believing something else in addition to (H), namely that your visual experiences are reliable. As a result (H) is not basic in the sense defined by EB. However, (H) might still be basic in the sense defined by DB. As long as your justification for (H) is owed solely to (E) and (M), neither of which includes any beliefs, DB tells us that (H) is basic. It follows that an experiential foundationalist who wishes to classify beliefs such as (H) as basic cannot adopt the compromise position. Such a foundationalist would have to say that (E) by itself is sufficient for making (H) a justified belief.

How do experiential foundationalists who prefer EB to DB answer the J-question? Because of the way they conceive of basicality, they cannot say that perceptual experiences are a source of justification for you because you have a reason, R, for believing that they do. For R would be justification for believing something else — the very thing that, according to EB, is an obstacle to basicality. One option for EB-foundationalists would be to endorse externalism. If they do, they could say that perceptual experiences are a source of justification if, and only if, they are of types that are reliably associated with true resulting beliefs. On that view, it would be the fact of reliability, not evidence of reliability, that makes perceptual experiences a source of justification. Another internalist option would be to say that perceptual experiences are a source of justification because it couldn't be otherwise: it's a necessary truth that certain perceptual experiences can justify certain perceptual beliefs. This would be an internalist answer to the J-question because perceptual experiences would be a source of justification whether or not they are reliable.

To conclude this section, let us briefly consider how justification is supposed to be transferred from basic to nonbasic beliefs. There are two options: the justificatory relation between basic and nonbasic beliefs could be deductive or non-deductive. If we take the relation to be deductive, each of one's nonbasic beliefs would have to be such that it can be deduced from one's basic beliefs. This seems excessively demanding. If we consider a random selection of typical beliefs we hold, it is not easy to see from which basic beliefs they could be deduced. Foundationalists, therefore, typically conceive of the link between the foundation and the superstructure in non-deductive terms. They would say that, for a basic belief, B, to justify a nonbasic belief, B*, it isn't necessary that B entails B*. Rather, it is sufficient that, given B, it is likely that B* is true.

Foundationalism says that knowledge and justification are structured like a building, consisting of a superstructure that rests upon a foundation. According to coherentism, this metaphor gets things wrong. Knowledge and justification are structured like a web where the strength of any given area depends on the strength of the surrounding areas. Coherentists, then, deny that there are any basic beliefs. As we saw in the previous section, there are two different ways of conceiving of basicality. Consequently, there are two corresponding ways of construing coherentism: as the denial of doxastic basicality or as the denial of epistemic basicality. Consider first coherentism as the denial of doxastic basicality:

Doxastic Coherentism
Every justified belief receives its justification from other beliefs in its epistemic neighborhood.

(H) That hat is blue.
Let's agree that (H) is justified. According to coherentism, (H) receives its justification from other beliefs in the epistemic vicinity of (H). They constitute your evidence or your reasons for taking (H) to be true. Which beliefs might make up this set of justification-conferring neighborhood beliefs?

We will consider two approaches to answering this question. The first is known as inference to the best explanation. Such inferences generate what is called explanatory coherence. According to this approach, we must suppose you form a belief about the way the hat appears to you in your perceptual experiences, and a second belief to the effect that your perceptual experience, the hat's looking blue to you, is best explained by the assumption that (H) is true. So the relevant set of beliefs is the following:

There are of course alternative explanations of why you have (E). Perhaps you are hallucinating that the hat is blue. Perhaps an evil demon makes the hat look blue to you when in fact it is red. Perhaps you are the sort of person to whom hats always look blue. An explanatory coherentist would say that, compared with these, the hat's actual blueness is a superior explanation. That's why your are justified in believing (H). Note that an explanatory coherentist can also explain the lack of justification. Suppose you remember that you just took a hallucinatory drug that makes things look blue to you. That would prevent you from being justified in believing (H). The explanatory coherentist can account for this by pointing out that, in the case we are considering now, the truth of (H) would not be the best explanation of why you are having experience (E). Rather, your having taken the hallucinatory drug would be an explanation at least as good as the assumption as (H) is true. That's why, according to the explanatory coherentist, in this variation of our original case you wouldn't be justified in be believing (H).

One problem for explanatory coherentists is to make us understand, in nonepistemic terms, why the favored explanation is really better than the competing explanations. Let's use the evil demon hypothesis to illustrate that difficulty. What we need is an explanation of why you are having (E). According to the evil demon hypothesis, you are having (E) because the evil demon is tricking you. The explanatory coherentist would say that this is a bad explanation of why you are having (E). But why would it be bad? What we need to answer this question is a general and principled account of what makes one explanation better than another. Suppose we appeal to the fact that you are not justified in believing in the existence of evil demons. The general idea would be this: If there are two competing explanations, E1 and E2, and E1 consists of or includes a proposition that you are not justified in believing whereas E2 does not, then E2 is better than E1. The problem with this idea is that it puts the cart before the horse. Explanatory coherentism is supposed to make us understand where justification comes from. It doesn't do that if it accounts for the difference between better and worse explanations by making use of the difference between justified and unjustified belief. If explanatory coherentism were to proceed in this way, it would be a circular, and thus uninformative, account of justification. So the challenge to which explanatory coherentism must rise is to give an account, without using the concept of justification, of what makes one explanation better than another.

Let us move on to the second way in which the coherentist approach might be carried out. Recall what a subject's justification for believing p is all about: possessing a link between the belief that p and p's truth. Suppose the subject knows that the origin of her belief that p is reliable. So she knows that beliefs coming from this source tend to be true. Such knowledge would give her an excellent link between the belief and its truth. So we might say that the neighborhood beliefs which confer justification on (H) are the following:

We have seen that explanatory coherentism and reliability coherentism each face its own distinctive circularity problem. Since both are versions of doxastic coherentism, they both face a further difficulty: Do people, under normal circumstances, really form beliefs like (1), (2), and (3)? It would seem they do not. It could be objected, therefore, that these two versions of coherentism make excessive intellectual demands of ordinary subjects who are unlikely to have the background beliefs that, according to these versions of coherentism, are needed for justification. This objection could be avoided by stripping coherentism of its doxastic element. The result would be the following version of coherentism, which results from rejecting EB (the epistemic conception of basicality):

Dependence Coherentism
Whenever one is justified in believing a proposition p1, one's justification for believing p1 depends on justification one has for believing some further propositions, p1, p2, ... pn.

Dependence coherentism is a significant departure from the way coherentism has typically been construed by its advocates. According to the typical construal of coherentism, the view says that a given belief is justified, the subject must have certain further beliefs that constitute reasons for the given belief. Dependence coherentism rejects this. According to it, justification need not come in the form of beliefs. It can come in the form of introspective and memorial evidence that gives a subject justification for beliefs about either reliability or explanatory coherence. In fact, dependence coherentism allows for the possibility that a belief is justified, not by receiving any of its justification from other beliefs, but solely by suitable perceptual experiences and memory content. Above, we called this view the compromise position. The compromise position, then, may be characterized as follows:

it allows for doxastic basicality;
it does not allow for epistemic basicality;
it is inconsistent with doxastic coherentism;
it qualifies as a version of coherentism, namely dependence coherentism.
Note that (iii) follows from (i), and (iv) from (ii). An uncompromising foundationalist would reject dependence coherentism. A foundationalist of that kind views a basic belief that p as a belief whose justification does not depend on having any justification for believing another proposition q. Foundationalism of this sort could be called independence foundationalism, since it asserts that a basic belief's justification is completely independent of having justification for any other beliefs. The logic of the conflict between foundationalism and coherentism seems to suggest that, ultimately, the conflict between the two views boils down to that between dependence coherentism and independence foundationalism.

Next, let us examine the reasons for and against in the debate over foundationalism and coherentism.

The main argument for foundationalism is called the regress argument. It's an argument from elimination. With regard to every justified belief, B1, the question arises of where B1's justification comes from. If B1 is not basic, it would have to come from another belief, B2. But B2 can justify B1 only if B2 is justified itself. If B2 is basic, the justificatory chain would end with B2. But if B2 is not basic, we need a further belief, B3. If B3 is not basic, we need a fourth belief, and so forth. Unless the ensuing regress terminates in a basic belief, we get two possibilities: the regress will either loop back to B1 or continue ad infinitum. According to the regress argument, both of these possibilities are unacceptable. Therefore, if there are justified beliefs, there must be basic beliefs.

This argument suffers from various weaknesses. First, we may wonder whether the alternatives to foundationalism are really unacceptable. In the recent literature on this subject, we actually find an elaborate defense of the position that infinitism is the correct solution to the regress problem. Nor should circularity be dismissed too quickly. The issue is not whether a simple argument of the form p therefore p is acceptable. Of course it is not. Rather, the issue is ultimately whether, in the attempt to show that trust in our faculties is reasonable, we may make use of the input our faculties deliver. Whether such circularity is as unacceptable as a p-therefore-p inference is an open question. Moreover, the avoidance of circularity does not come cheap. Experiential foundationalists claim that perception is a source of justification. Hence they need to answer the J-question: Why is perception a source of justification? As we saw above, if we wish to answer this question without committing ourselves to the kind of circularity dependence coherentism involves, we must choose between externalism and an appeal to brute necessity. Neither choice is unproblematic.

The second weakness of the regress argument is that its conclusion merely says this: If there are justified beliefs, there must be justified beliefs that do not receive their justification from other beliefs. Its conclusion does not say that, if there are justified beliefs, there must be beliefs whose justification is independent of any justification for further beliefs. So the regress argument, if it were sound, would merely show that there must be doxastic basicality. Dependence coherentism, however, allows for doxastic basicality. So the regress argument merely defends experiential foundationalism against doxastic coherentism. It does not tell us why we should prefer independence foundationalism to dependence coherentism.

Experiential foundationalism can be supported by citing cases like the blue hat example. Such examples make it plausible to assume that perceptual experiences are a source of justification. But they do not arbitrate between dependence coherentism and independence foundationalism, since either one of these views appeals to perceptual experiences to explain why perceptual beliefs are justified.

Finally, foundationalism can be supported by advancing objections to coherentism. One prominent objection is that coherentism somehow fails to ensure that a justified belief system is in contact with reality. This objection derives its force from the fact that fiction can be perfectly coherent. Why think, therefore, that a belief system's coherence is a reason for thinking that the belief in that system tend to be true? Coherentists could respond to this objection by saying that, if a belief system contains beliefs such as Many of my beliefs have their origin in perceptual experiences and My perceptual experiences are reliable, it is reasonable for the subject to think that her belief system brings her into contact with external reality. This looks like an effective response to the no-contact-with-reality objection. Moreover, it is not easy to see why foundationalism itself should be better positioned than coherentism when contact with reality is the issue. What is meant by ensuring contact with reality? If foundationalists expect a logical guarantee of such contact, basic beliefs must be infallible. That would make contact with reality a rather expensive commodity. Given its price, foundationalists might want to lower their expectations. According to an alternative construal, we expect merely the likelihood of contact with reality. But if coherentists account for the importance of perception in one way or another, they can meet that expectation as well as foundationalists.

Since coherentism can be construed in different ways, it is unlikely that there is one single objection that succeeds in refuting all possible versions of coherentism. Doxastic coherentism, however, seems particularly vulnerable to criticism coming from the foundationalist camp. One of these we considered already: It would seem that doxastic coherentism makes excessive intellectual demands on believers. When dealing with the mundane tasks of everyday life, we don't normally bother to form beliefs about the explanatory coherence of our beliefs or the reliability of our belief sources. According to a second objection, doxastic coherentism fails by being insensitive to the epistemic relevance of perceptual experiences. Foundationalists could argue as follows. Suppose Kim is observing a chameleon that rapidly changes its colors. A moment ago it was blue, now it's purple. Kim still believes it's blue. Her belief is now unjustified because she believes the chameleon is blue even though it looks purple to her. Then the chameleon changes its color back to blue. Now Kim's belief that the chameleon is blue is justified again because the chameleon once again looks blue to her. The point would be that what's responsible for the changing justificatory status of Kim's belief is solely the way the chameleon looks to her. Since doxastic coherentism does not attribute epistemic relevance to perceptual experiences by themselves, it cannot explain why Kim's belief is first justified, then unjustified, and eventually justified again.

Coherentism is typically defended by attacking foundationalism as a viable alternative. To argue against privilege foundationalism, coherentists pick an epistemic privilege they think is essential to foundationalism, and then argue that either no beliefs, or too few beliefs, enjoy such a privilege. Against experiential foundationalism, different objections have been advanced. One line of criticism is that perceptual experiences don't have propositional content. Therefore, the relation between a perceptual belief and the perceptual experience that gives rise to it can only be causal. Consider again, however, the hat example from above. When you see the hat and it looks blue to you, doesn't your visual experience — its looking blue to you — have the propositional content that the hat is blue? It would seem it does. If it does, there seems to be no reason to deny that your perceptual experience can play a justificatory role.

Another line of thought is that, if perceptual experiences have propositional content, they cannot stop the justificatory regress because they would then be in need of justification themselves. That, however, appears to be a strange thought. In our actual epistemic practice, we never demand of others to justify the way things appear to them in their perceptual experiences. Indeed, such a demand would seem absurd. Suppose I ask you: Why do you think that the hat is blue? You answer: Because it looks blue to me. There are sensible further questions I might ask at that point. For instance, I might ask: Why do you think its looking blue to you gives you a reason for thinking it is blue? Or I might ask: Couldn't you be mistaken in believing it looks blue to you? The latter question might irritate you, but it would not be illegitimate. After all, we can reasonably doubt that introspective beliefs about how things appear to us are infallible. But now suppose I ask you: Why do you suppose the perceptual experience in which the hat looks blue to you is justified? In response to that question, you should accuse me of misusing the word justification. I might as well ask you what it is that justifies your headache when you have one, or what justifies the itch in your nose when you have one. The latter questions, you should reply, would be as absurd as my request for stating a justifying reason for your perceptual experience.

Experiential foundationalism, then, is not easily dislodged. On what grounds could coherentists object to it? To raise problems for experiential foundationalism, coherentists could press the J-question: Why are perceptual experiences a source of justification? If foundationalists answer the J-question appealing to evidence that warrants the attribution of reliability to perceptual experiences, experiential foundationalism morphs into dependence coherentism, or, as we have called it, the compromise position. To avoid this outcome, foundationalists would have to give an alternative answer. One way of doing this would be to advocate independence foundationalism, which adopts the epistemic conception of basicality and views it as a matter of brute necessity that perception is a source of justification. So ultimately, the task of defending coherentism might come down to the task of showing that dependence coherentism as a compromise position is preferable to independence foundationalism. To back up such a preference, it might be argued that dependence coherentism gives us a more satisfying answer to the J-question than independence foundationalism does. But is that really so?

Suppose we ask Why is the sum of two and two four? Isn't the answer It couldn't be any other way perfectly satisfactory? So sometimes, at least, a request for explaining the truth of p is met in a satisfying way by pointing out that p is necessarily true. Why, then, should we not be satisfied when independence foundationalists answer the J-question by saying that perceptual experiences are necessarily a source of justification? To find out whether we should be satisfied, we might employ thought experiments. We might try to describe a possible world in which, to use our example again, someone sees an object that looks blue to her, but the object's looking blue to her does not give her any justification at all for believing that the object is actually blue. If we can conceive of such a possible world, then we have reason to think that independence foundationalists are mistaken when they say that perceptual experience is necessarily a source of justification.

Beliefs arise in people for a wide variety of causes. Among them, we must list psychological factors such as desires, emotional needs, prejudice, and biases of various kinds. Obviously, when beliefs originate in sources like these, they don't qualify as knowledge even if true. For true beliefs to count as knowledge, it is necessary that they originate in sources we have good reason to consider reliable. These are perception, introspection, memory, reason, and testimony. Let us briefly consider each of these.

Our perceptual faculties are our five senses: sight, touch, hearing, smelling, and tasting. We must distinguish between an experience that can be classified as perceiving that p (for example, seeing that there is coffee in the cup and tasting that it is sweet), which entails that p is true, and a perceptual experience in which it seems to us as though p, but where p might be false. Let us refer to this latter kind of experience as perceptual seemings. The reason for making this distinction lies in the fact that perceptual experience is fallible. The world is not always as it appears to us in our perceptual experiences. We need, therefore, a way of referring to perceptual experiences in which p seems to be the case that allows for the possibility of p being false. That's the role assigned to perceptual seemings. So some perceptual seemings that p are cases of perceiving that p, others are not. When it looks to you as though there is a cup of coffee on the table and in fact there is, the two states coincide. If, however, you hallucinate that there is a cup on the table, you have perceptual seeming that p without perceiving that p.

One family of epistemological issues about perception arises when we concern ourselves with the psychological nature of the perceptual processes through which we acquire knowledge of external objects. According to direct realism, we can acquire such knowledge because we can directly perceive such objects. For example, when you see a tomato on the table, what you perceive is the tomato itself. According to indirect realism, we acquire knowledge of external objects by virtue of perceiving something else, namely appearances or sense-data. An indirect realist would say that, when you see and thus know that there is a tomato on the table, what you really see is not the tomato itself but a tomato-like sense-datum or some such entity.

Direct and indirect realists hold different views about the structure of perceptual knowledge. Indirect realists would say that we acquire perceptual knowledge of external objects by virtue of perceiving sense data that represent external objects. Sense data, a species of mental states, enjoy a special status: we know directly what they are like. So indirect realists think that, when perceptual knowledge is foundational, it is knowledge of sense data and other mental states. Knowledge of external objects is indirect: derived from our knowledge of sense data. The basic idea is that we have indirect knowledge of the external world because we can have foundational knowledge of our own mind. Direct realists can be more liberal about the foundation of our knowledge of external objects. Since they hold that perceptual experiences get you in direct contact with external objects, they can say that such experiences can give you foundational knowledge of external objects.

We take our perceptual faculties to be reliable. But how can we know that they are reliable? For externalists, this might not be much of a challenge. If the use of reliable faculties is sufficient for knowledge, and if by using reliable faculties we acquire the belief that our faculties are reliable, then we come to know that our faculties are reliable. But even externalists might wonder how they can, via argument, show that our perceptual faculties are reliable. The problem is this. It would seem the only way of acquiring knowledge about the reliability of our perceptual faculties is through memory, through remembering whether they served us well in the past. But should I trust my memory, and should I think that the episodes of perceptual success that I seem to recall were in fact episodes of perceptual success? If I am entitled to answer these questions with yes, then I need to have, to begin with, reason to view my memory and my perceptual experiences as reliable. It would seem, therefore, that there is no non-circular way of arguing for the reliability of one's perceptual faculties.

Introspection is the capacity to inspect the, metaphorically speaking, inside of one's mind. Through introspection, one knows what mental states one is in: whether one is thirsty, tired, excited, or depressed. Compared with perception, introspection appears to have a special status. It is easy to see how a perceptual seeming can go wrong: what looks like a cup of coffee on the table might be just be a clever hologram that's visually indistinguishable from an actual cup of coffee. But could it be possible that it introspectively seems to me that I have a headache when in fact I do not? It is not easy to see how it could be. Thus we come to think that introspection has a special status. Compared with perception, introspection seems to be privileged by virtue of being less error prone. How can we account for the special status of introspection?

First, it could be argued that, when it comes to introspection, there is no difference between appearance and reality; therefore, introspective seemings are necessarily successful introspections. According to this approach, introspection is infallible. Alternatively, one could view introspection as a source of certainty. Here the idea is that an introspective experience of p eliminates all possible doubt as to whether p is true. Finally, one could attempt to explain the specialness of introspection by examining the way we respond to first-person reports: typically, we attribute a special authority to such reports. According to this approach, introspection is incorrigible. Others are not, or at least not typically, in a position to correct first-person reports of one's own mental states.

Introspection reveals how the world appears to us in our perceptual experiences. For that reason, introspection has been of special interest to foundationalists. Perception is not immune to error. If certainty consists in the absence of all possible doubt, perception fails to yield certainty. Hence beliefs based on perceptual experiences cannot be foundational. Introspection, however, might deliver what we need to find a firm foundation for our beliefs about external objects: at best outright immunity to error or all possible doubt, or perhaps more modestly, an epistemic kind of directness that cannot be found in perception.

Is it really true, however, that, compared with perception, introspection is in some way special? Critics of foundationalism have argued that introspection is certainly not infallible. Might one not confuse an unpleasant itch for a pain? Might I not think that the shape before me appears circular to me when in fact it appears slightly elliptical to me? If it is indeed possible for introspection to mislead, then it is hard to see why introspection should eliminate all possible doubt. Yet it isn't easy to see either how, if one clearly and distinctly feels a throbbing headache, one could be mistaken about that. Introspection, then, turns out to be a mysterious faculty. On the one hand, it does not seem to be in general an infallible faculty; on the other hand, when looking at appropriately described specific cases, error does seem impossible.

Memory is the capacity to retain knowledge acquired in the past. What one remembers, though, need not be a past event. It may be a present fact, such as one's telephone number, or a future event, such as the date of the next elections. Memory is, of course, fallible. Not every instance of taking oneself to remember that p is an instance of actually remembering that p. We should distinguish, therefore, between remembering that p (which entails the truth of p) and seeming to remember that p (which does not entail the truth of p).

One issue about memory concerns the question of what distinguishes memorial seemings from perceptual seemings or mere imagination. Some philosophers have thought that having an image in one's mind is essential to memory, but that would appear to be mistaken. When one remembers one's telephone number, one is unlikely to have an image of one's number in one's mind. The distinctively epistemological questions about memory are these: First, what makes memorial seemings a source of justification? Is it a necessary truth that, if one has a memorial seeming that p, one has thereby prima facie justification for p? Or is memory a source of justification only if, as coherentists might say, one has reason to think that one's memory is reliable? Or is memory a source of justification only if, as externalists would say, it is in fact reliable? Second, how can we respond to skepticism about knowledge of the past? Memorial seemings of the past do not guarantee that the past is what we take it to be. We think that we are a bit older than just five minutes, but it is logically possible that the world sprang into existence just five minutes ago, complete with our dispositions to have memorial seemings of a more distant past and items such as apparent fossils that suggest a past going back millions of years. Our seeming to remember that the world is older than a mere five minutes does not entail, therefore, that it really is. Why, then, should we think that memory is a source of knowledge about the past?

Some beliefs would appear to be justified solely by the use of reason. Justification of that kind is said to be a priori: prior to any kind of experience. A standard way of defining a priori justification goes as follows:

A Priori Justification
S is justified a priori in believing that p if and only if S's justification for believing that p does not depend on any experience.
Beliefs that are true and justified in this way (and not somehow gettiered) would count as instances of a priori knowledge.

What exactly counts as experience? If by experience we mean just perceptual experiences, justification deriving from introspective or memorial experiences would count as a priori. For example, I could then know a priori that I'm thirsty, or what I ate for breakfast this morning. While the term a priori is sometimes used in this way, the strict use of the term restricts a priori justification to justification derived solely from the use of reason. According to this usage, the word experiences' in the definition above includes perceptual, introspective, and memorial experiences alike. On this narrower understanding, paradigm examples of what I can know on the basis of a priori justification are conceptual truths (such as All bachelors are unmarried), and truths of mathematics, geometry and logic.

Several important issues arise about a priori knowledge. First, does it exist at all? Skeptics about apriority deny its existence. They don't mean to say that we have no knowledge of mathematics, geometry, logic, and conceptual truths. Rather, what they claim is that all such knowledge is empirical.

Second, if a priori justification is possible, exactly how does it come about? What makes a belief such as All bachelors are unmarried justified solely on the basis of reason? Is it an unmediated grasp of the truth of this proposition? Or does it consist of grasping that the proposition is necessarily true? Or is it the purely intellectual experience of seeing (with they eye of reason) or intuiting that this proposition is true (or necessarily true)? Or is it, as externalists would suggest, the reliability of the cognitive process by which we come to recognize the truth of such a proposition?

Third, if a priori knowledge exists, what is its extent? Empiricists have argued that a priori knowledge is limited to the realm of the analytic, consisting of propositions of a somehow inferior status because they are not really about the world. Propositions of a superior status, which convey genuine information about world, are labeled synthetic. a priori knowledge of synthetic propositions, empiricists would say, is not possible. Rationalists deny this. They would say that a proposition such as If a ball is green all over, then it doesn't have black spots is synthetic and knowable a priori.

A fourth question about the nature of a priori knowledge concerns the distinction between necessary and contingent truths. The received view is that whatever is known a priori is necessarily true, but there are epistemologists who disagree with that.

The epistemological puzzle testimony raises is this: Why is testimony a source of knowledge? An externalist might say that testimony is a source of knowledge if and only if it comes from a reliable source. But here, even more so than in the case of our faculties, internalists will not find that answer satisfactory. Suppose you hear someone saying p. Suppose further that person is in fact utterly reliable with regard to the question of whether p is the case or not. Finally, suppose you have no evidential clue whatever as to that person's reliability. Wouldn't it be plausible to conclude that, since that person's reliability is unknown to you, that person's saying p does not put you in a position to know that p? But if the reliability of a testimonial source is not sufficient for making it a source of knowledge, what else is needed? Thomas Reid suggested that, by our very nature, we accept testimonial sources as reliable and tend to attribute credibility to them unless we encounter special contrary reasons. But that's merely a statement of the attitude we in fact take toward testimony. What is it that makes that attitude reasonable? It could be argued that, in one's own personal experiences with testimonial sources, one has accumulated a long track record that can be taken as a sign of reliability. However, when we think of the sheer breadth of the knowledge we derive from testimony, one wonders whether one's personal experiences constitute an evidence base rich enough to justify the attribution of reliability to the totality of the testimonial sources one tends to trust. An alternative to the track record approach would be to declare it a necessary truth that trust in testimonial sources is justified. This suggestion, alas, encounters the same difficulty as the externalist approach to testimony: it does not seem we can acquire knowledge from sources the reliability of which is utterly unknown to us.

According to skeptics, the limits of what you know are narrower than you would like to think. There are many things that you think you know but actually fail to know. For example, you think you know that you have hands, but in fact you don't. How can the skeptics expect you to take such a strange conclusion seriously? Here's how. As a first step, the skeptics will focus on another proposition, about which you are likely to agree that you don't know it. As a second step, they will get you to agree that, since you don't know that second proposition, you don't know the first one either: the proposition that you have hands.

When the skeptics get their argument started with some other proposition about which you are likely to agree you don't know it, what do they have in mind? They direct your attention to what is called a skeptical hypothesis. According to a skeptical hypothesis, things are radically different from what you take them to be. Here are several examples:

I'm lying in my bed dreaming.
I'm deceived by an evil demon.
I'm a mere brain-in-a-vat (a BIV).
I'm in the matrix world.

Let us now focus on the second step. The basic thought is that, if you don't know you're not a BIV, you don't know you have hands. That thought is extremely plausible. After all, if you are a BIV, you don't have any hands. So if you can't distinguish between being and not being a BIV, you can't distinguish either between having and not having hands. But if you can't distinguish between having and not having hands, surely you don't know that you have hands. Putting the two steps of the skeptic's reasoning together, we get the following argument:

The BIV Argument
(1) I don't know that I'm not a BIV.
(2) If I don't know that I'm not a BIV, then I don't know that I have hands.
Therefore:
(3) I don't know that I have hands.

The second premise is closely connected to the principle that knowledge is closed under known entailment, for short, the closure principle. Setting complications aside, it says the following:

The Closure Principle
If I know that p, and I know that p entails q, then I know that q.
This principle is exceedingly plausible. Here's an example to illustrate it. Suppose you had exactly two beers. Your having had exactly two beers entails that you had less than three beers. If you know both of these things, then you know that you had less than three beers. This much, certainly, seems beyond dispute.

How is the closure principle related to the skeptical argument? The connection can be seen when you replace p and q with the relevant propositions:

p: I have hands.
q: I'm not a BIV.
Making these replacements, we get the following application of the closure principle to the BIV argument:

BIV Closure
If I know that I have hands, and I know that my having hands entails my not being a BIV, then I know that I'm not a BIV.
According to the skeptical argument, you can't know that you are not a BIV. So the consequent of BIV closure is false. Therefore, the antecedent of BIV closure must be false. The antecedent of BIV closure is a conjunction. The second conjunct can't be argued with. If you understand what is meant by the BIV hypothesis, then you know that you don't have hands if you are a BIV. If follows that the antecedent of BIV Closure is false because its first conjunct is false. So starting out with the closure principle, we arrive at the skeptical conclusion: You don't know that you have hands.

Next, we will examine various responses to the BIV argument. According to the first, we should distinguish between relevant and irrelevant alternatives. An alternative to a state of affairs or proposition p is any state of affairs or proposition that is incompatible with p. Your having hands and your being a BIV are alternatives: if the former is true, the latter is false, and vice versa. According to the thought that motivates the second premise of the BIV argument, you know that you have hands only if you can discriminate between your actually having hands and the alternative of being a (handless) BIV. But you can't discriminate between these two states of affairs. That's why you don't know that you have hands. In response to such reasoning, a relevant alternatives theorist would say that your inability to discriminate between these two states of affairs is not an obstacle to your knowing that you have hands because your being a BIV is not a relevant alternative to your having hands. What would be a relevant alternative? This, for example: your arms ending in stumps rather than hands, or your having hooks instead of hands, or your having prosthetic hands. But these alternatives don't prevent you from knowing that you have hands — not because they are irrelevant, but rather because you can discriminate between these alternatives and your having hands. The relevant alternative theorist holds, therefore, that you do know that you have hands.

The BIV argument is valid. Relevant alternative theorists must therefore deny one of its premises. Since they agree that you don't know that your are not a BIV, they accept the first premise. Consequently, they reject the second premise. You know that you have hands even though you don't know that you are not a BIV. This means, in effect, that relevant alternative theorists deny the closure principle. Let's consider the details of this point. Relevant alternative theorists say:

You know you have hands.
You know that your having hands entails your not being a BIV.
You don't know that you are not a BIV.
Relevant alternative theorists, then, assert the antecedent and deny the consequent of BIV closure, as stated in the previous section. They are, therefore, committed to the claim that the closure principle is false.

There are two chief problems for this approach. The first is that denouncing the BIV alternative as irrelevant is ad hoc unless it is supplemented with a principled account of what makes one alternative relevant and another irrelevant. The second is that the closure principle enjoys a high degree of intrinsic plausibility. Denying it generates so-called abominable conjunctions. Here is one:

An Abominable Conjunction
I know that I have hands but I do not know that I am not a (handless) BIV.
Many epistemologists would agree that this conjunction is indeed abominable because it blatantly violates the basic and extremely plausible intuition that you can't know you have hands without knowing that you are not a BIV.

Next, let us consider a response to the BIV argument according to which it's not the second but the first premise that must be rejected. G. E. Moore has pointed out that an argument succeeds only to the extent that its premises are more plausible than the conclusion. So if we encounter an argument whose conclusion we don't like, and notice that the denial of the conclusion is actually quite plausible, in fact more plausible than the assertion of the premises, then we can turn the argument on its head. According to this approach, we can respond to the BIV argument as follows:

Counter BIV
(1) I know that I have hands.
(2) If I don't know that I'm not a BIV, then I don't know that I have hands.
Therefore:
(3) I know that I am not a BIV.
Unless we are skeptics or opponents of closure, we would have to concede that this argument is sound. It is valid, and its premises are true. Yet few philosophers would agree that Counter BIV amounts to a satisfying response to the BIV argument. What needs to be accomplished is more than a mere assertion of (3), based on knowledge of one's hands. What we need to have explained to us is how one can know that one is not a BIV. The observation that the premises of the BIV argument are less plausible than the denial of its conclusion doesn't help us understand how such knowledge is possible. That's why the Moorean response falls short of being a successful rebuttal of the skeptical argument.

We have looked at two responses to the BIV argument. The relevant alternatives response denies the second premise. Because of the plausibility of the second premise, this might strike us as a desperation move. The Moorean response denies the first premise. The problem with that move is this: Unless we are provided with a convincing explanation of how one can know that one isn't a BIV, it's not more than just digging in one's non-skeptical heels. According to contextualism, it's possible to articulate a more satisfying reply to the BIV argument. The trick is to focus on how we actually use the word know. If we do that, we'll notice that our use of that word varies from one situation — from one context — to another. What so varies is what we mean by that word.

Three questions arise immediately. First, what are these various meanings of the word know? Second, why and how does what we mean by know change from one context to another? Third, how does the context-sensitivity of know help us respond to the BIV argument? Let us consider each question in turn.

First, when what we mean by know changes from one context to another, what changes is the standards that we think must be met if someone is to have knowledge of something. For the sake of keeping things simple, let's distinguish between just two sets of standards: very high and not so high. Let's refer to them as high and low standards. In some contexts, when we use the word know, we have low standards of knowledge in mind: standards that are easy to meet. We will then ascribe knowledge liberally. In other contexts, our use of the word know is guided by more demanding high standards. Meeting these is very difficult. In such contexts, we will ascribe knowledge only reluctantly. Second, what effects such changes in what we mean by know? According to some contextualists, it is the salience of error-possibilities. In an ordinary, low-standard context, you don't worry about being a BIV. It's an error possibility you ignore. As a result, your standards of knowledge remain low. In such a context, all it takes for you to know you have hands is that you can discriminate between having hands and having stumps, hooks, or prosthetic hands. That's a condition you easily meet. Hence you will not be reluctant at all to ascribe to yourself knowledge of your hands. But suppose you start thinking about the problem of skepticism. You're wondering how you could know that you are not a BIV. You come to note that it's very difficult to know that one isn't a BIV. The BIV alternative is now salient to you. This makes your standards of knowledge rise. Bearing in mind that BIVs don't have hands, you now think that, for you to know that you have hands, you must be able to eliminate the error possibility of being a BIV. Since you realize you can't eliminate that possibility, you are no longer willing to ascribe to yourself knowledge of your hands.

Third, how does all of that help us find a reply to the BIV argument? Contextualists view the BIV argument as presenting us with a paradox. We think it's crazy to deny knowledge of our hands. At the same time, we don't think one can know that one isn't a BIV. How can the conflict between these thoughts be resolved? Contextualists propose to resolve it by saying this: In low standard contexts (when skeptical hypotheses are not salient), the first premise and the conclusion of the BIV argument are both false. In such contexts, a speaker who says You don't know that you have hands or You don't know that you are not a BIV is mistaken. The speaker is mistaken because we do in fact meet low standards of knowledge. So relative to what we mean by know in such contexts, we know that we have hands and that we are not BIVs. However, in high standard contexts (when an error possibility such as being a BIV is salient), the first premise and the conclusion of the BIV argument are both true. Now, when speakers say You don't know that you have hands or You don't know that you are not a BIV, they are correct, for with regard to having hands and being or not being a BIV, our epistemic position is not strong enough for us to meet high standards of knowledge. Therefore, relative to what we mean by know when we are confronted with a salient error possibility such as being a BIV, we know neither that we have hands nor that we are not BIVs.

Contextualism is intended as a closure preserving response to skepticism. The closure principle is true even relative to knowledge attributions that are subject to high standards. Hence, according to contextualism, things fall into place as follows:

we know the closure principle whether the meaning of know is fixed by high or low standards;
when the meaning of know is fixed by low standards, we know both that we have hands and that we are not BIVs;
when the meaning of know is fixed by high standards, we know neither that we have hands nor that we are not BIVs.
As a result, closure is preserved. Contextualism is also meant to be an improvement over the Moorean response. According to that response, the first premise of the BIV argument is false. This conflicts with our intuition that we cannot know that we are not BIVs. Contextualism resolves this conflict by saying that the first premise is false only in low standards contexts. In high standards contexts, that premise is true.

Naturally, contextualism has elicited many objections. According to one, what's wrong with contextualism is that it replaces our interest in knowledge itself with focus on the word know. This objection (let us call it the replacement objection) is based on a misunderstanding of contextualism. In the next section, we will see why.

According to another objection, contextualism overemphasizes the importance of the context sensitivity of the word know. Let us distinguish between two elements of contextualism. The first is semantic ascent. If we endorse the semantic ascent element, we think that a satisfactory response to skepticism in general and the BIV argument in particular requires of us to distinguish between a high-standards and a low-standards meaning of knowledge. The semantic ascent thesis remains squarely within the limits of traditional epistemology. Indeed, in any area of philosophy, it's always going to be a good idea to remain aware of the possibility that the problems in which one finds oneself entangled might, at least to some extent, be due to subtle (and sometimes not so subtle) shifts in meaning. The other element of contextualism could be called strict context-sensitivity, as opposed to loose context sensitivity. Consider the thesis that the meaning of the word know varies with context. There is an innocuous interpretation of this thesis: people do not always mean the same when they use the word know. Sometimes they mean one thing by know, at other times they mean another thing by know. This is loose context sensitivity. It's hard to see on what grounds such a weak claim might be disputed. Contextualists, however, make a stronger claim. They assert that what one means by know is determined, in a way that's very difficult to resist, by the salience or non-salience of error possibilities. That's strict context sensitivity. If we endorse strict context sensitivity, there's something important that drops out: how one intends to use the word know. An alternative semantics of the word know will de-emphasize the importance of the salience or non-salience of error possibilities and ascribe a much higher degree of semantic independence to the subjects who use the word know. Next, let's consider a response to the BIV argument that retains the semantic ascent element of contextualism, but rejects strong context sensitivity.

What proposition a knowledge-attributing sentence expresses depends on what concept of knowledge the person who uses that sentence (in spoken or written form) has in mind when using the word know. Let's distinguish between two concepts: a high-standards and a low-standards concept. There are various ways of cashing out this distinction. We will understand it in terms of fallible and infallible evidence. High-standards or infallible knowledge of p requires p-entailing evidence. Low-standards of fallible knowledge of p requires adequate evidence for p, where evidence for p can be adequate without entailing p.

According to the ambiguity response, a knowledge-attributing sentence is ambiguous unless we can tell whether the word know, as it occurs in that sentence, refers to fallible or infallible knowledge. Suppose we think that fallible knowledge of one's hands is possible, whereas infallible knowledge of one's hands is not. Suppose further we hear Jane say Carl knows that he has hands. Finally, suppose we have no idea whether Jane uses the word know in the fallible or infallible sense. In that case, we would have to say that Jane's utterance is true if interpreted as a claim about fallible knowledge, but false if interpreted as a claim about infallible knowledge. Now, with regard to the BIV argument, we are in a similar situation. We have not been instructed on whether the word know in its premises and its conclusion is to be understood in the fallible or infallible sense. Consequently, when assessing the merits of the BIV argument, we must consider three versions of it:

The Mixed Version
In the premises, the word know refers to infallible knowledge, whereas in the conclusion, it refers to fallible knowledge.
The High-Standards Version
The word know refers to infallible knowledge in both the premises and the conclusion.

The Low-Standards Version
The word know refers to fallible knowledge in both the premises and the conclusion.

Distinguishing between these three versions, proponents of the ambiguity response can reply to the BIV argument as follows:

The mixed version is an instance of equivocation and thus invalid.
The high-standards version is sound but uninteresting. Its conclusion asserts that we don't have infallible knowledge of our hands. That's nothing to worry about. What really matters to us is whether we have fallible knowledge of our hands. But that question simply isn't addressed by the high-standards version.
The low-standards version is interesting but unsound. Its conclusion — we do not even have fallible knowledge of our hands — is indeed disturbing. If this conclusion were true, then we would be in a radical way mistaken about what we think we know. However, we don't have to accept this conclusion because the argument's first premise is false. According to that premise, one cannot even have fallible knowledge of one's not being a BIV. That's false. There is, after all, good evidence for thinking that one's is not a BIV. This evidence is good enough for knowing that one isn't a BIV even though it does not entail that one isn't a BIV.
Suppose an opponent of the ambiguity response were to employ the replacement objection, claiming that the response focuses on the word know instead of knowledge itself. This objection would be misguided. The ambiguity response mentions the word know only at the initial stage, and then immediately shifts its focus to non-linguistic entities such as concepts and propositions. So advocates of the ambiguity response would point out that, when we distinguish between versions (i) through (iii), we are concerned with which propositions the premises and the conclusion of the BIV argument express, and thus are ultimately concerned with knowledge itself. The upshot of their reply, then, is to distinguish between the following two propositions:

(Kif) I knowif that I have hands.
(Kf) I knowf that I have hands.
where the term knowif in (Kif) refers to infallible knowledge, whereas the term knowf in Kf refers to fallible knowledge. Both of these proposition are about knowledge itself, or, more precisely, about different kinds of knowledge. The ambiguity response, therefore, is not vulnerable to the replacement objection. Neither is contextualism. For according to contextualism, what context determines is precisely which proposition the conclusion of the BIV argument expresses: (Kif) or (Kf). Hence contextualism, is, notwithstanding initial appearance, just as much about knowledge itself as is the ambiguity response.

How, then, do contextualism and the ambiguity response differ? Both share the semantic ascent element. A satisfactory response to skepticism requires of us to distinguish between various meanings of the word know. Beyond that, they proceed in different directions. Whereas according to contextualism, whether we reject or endorse the conclusion of the BIV argument is a function of which context we are in, the ambiguity response makes context irrelevant. It makes context irrelevant because, no matter which context we are in, we can always disambiguate. So, when we are thinking about or discussing the BIV argument and are thus confronted with a salient error possibility, we need not adopt a high-standards meaning of know. Rather, we can respond to the argument by saying that, if it is about infallible knowledge its conclusion is true but unremarkable, whereas if it is about fallible knowledge its conclusion is remarkable but false.

Contextualism and the ambiguity response, as discussed in the previous two sections, leave out one important detail. Contextualists say that, relative to the standards of knowledge operational in low-standards contexts, one can know that one isn't a BIV. Ambiguity theorists say that, in the fallibilist sense of know, one can know that one isn't a BIV. It might be objected that this is a bit optimistic. Let us look at the issue from the evidentialist point of view. An evidentialist who employs the ambiguity response would have to say that one's evidence for thinking one isn't a BIV is good enough for knowledge. But when the BIV hypothesis was introduced, we noted that part of the hypothesis is the following point: whether you are a normal person or a BIV makes no difference with regard to your evidence: it's the same in either case. Call this the identical evidence thesis. This thesis is simply part of the hypothesis in question and must therefore be granted. How, then, could one possibly know, even in the fallibilist sense of know, that one isn't a BIV?

It would be a mistake to think the identical evidence thesis entails that, as a normal person, one doesn't have good evidence for thinking that one isn't a BIV. Nor does it entail that, as a BIV, one doesn't have good evidence for thinking that one isn't a BIV. What it entails is merely this: Whatever evidence one has, as a normal person regarding the question of whether one is a BIV, one would have that very same evidence if one were a BIV. This leaves open the possibility that in either case, as a BIV or as a normal person, one has excellent evidence for thinking that one is not a BIV.

What might evidence for thinking that one isn't a BIV consist of? For reasons of space, we will merely hint, by way of analogy, at how this question might be answered. Note that the BIV hypothesis entails various rather problematic propositions:

(a) At least one BIV exists.
(b) The know-how needed for envatting people exists.
(c) The technology needed for envatting people exists.
Compare:

(d) At least one spaceship exists that can be used for traveling to another galaxy and coming back within a couple of months.
(e) The know-how needed for building such a spaceship exists.
(f) The technology needed for building such a spaceship exists.
According to the evidentialist anti-skepticism under consideration here, you know, on the basis of your knowledge of how the world works, that (d)–(f) are all false. In the very least, you can come to know this by consulting suitable experts. But what about (a) through (c)? Well, if you know or can come to know that (d)–(f) are all false, isn't it plausible to claim that you also know or can come to know that (a)–(c) are all false? If a skeptic were to argue that you know that (d)–(f) are all false, while you do not know that any proposition in (a)–(c) is false, that skeptic would incur the burden of having to dislodge the analogy, of having to explain why, whereas knowledge that (d)–(f) are all false is easily obtainable, knowledge of the falsehood of each (a)–(c) is beyond our reach. This might not be easily accomplished.

Epistemology, as commonly practiced, focuses on the subject's beliefs. Are they justified? Are they instances of knowledge? When it comes to assessing how the subject herself is doing with regard to the pursuit of truth and the seeking of knowledge, this assessment is carried out by looking at the epistemic quality of her beliefs. According to virtue epistemology, the order of analysis ought to be reversed. We need to begin with the subject herself and assess her epistemic virtues and vices: her good and her bad ways of forming beliefs. Careful and attentive reasoning would be an example of an epistemic virtue; jumping to conclusions would be an example of an epistemic vice. It is only after we have determined which ways of forming beliefs count as epistemic virtues that we can, as a second step, determine the epistemic quality of particular beliefs. Its proponents construe virtue epistemology more or less stringently. According to pure virtue epistemology, epistemic virtues and vices are sui generis. They cannot be analyzed in terms of more fundamental epistemic or nonepistemic concepts. Proponents of a less stringent approach disagree with this; they would say that epistemic virtues and vices can fruitfully be analyzed by employing other concepts. Indeed, according to an externalist strand of virtue epistemology, it is the very notion of reliability that we should employ to capture the difference between epistemic virtues and vices. Stable ways of forming beliefs are epistemic virtues if and only if they tend to result in true beliefs, epistemic vices if and only if they tend to result in false beliefs. Virtue epistemology, thus conceived, is a form of reliabilism.

According to an extreme version of naturalistic epistemology, the project of traditional epistemology, pursued in an a priori fashion from the philosopher's armchair, is completely misguided. The fruits of such activity are demonstrably false theories such as foundationalism, as well as endless and arcane debates in the attempt to tackle questions to which there are no answers. To bring epistemology on the right path, it must be made a part of the natural sciences and become cognitive psychology. The aim of naturalistic epistemology thus understood is to replace traditional epistemology with an altogether new and redefined project. According to a moderate version of naturalistic epistemology, one primary task of epistemology is to identify how knowledge and justification are anchored in the natural world, just as it is the purpose of physics to explain phenomena like heat and cold, or thunder and lightning in terms of properties of the natural world. The pursuit of this task does not require of its proponents to replace traditional epistemology. Rather, this moderate approach accepts the need for cooperation between traditional conceptual analysis and empirical methods. The former is needed for the purpose of establishing a conceptual link between knowledge and reliability, the latter for figuring out which cognitive processes are reliable and which are not.

In the history of philosophy, there are several famous arguments for the existence of God: the ontological argument, the cosmological argument, and the argument from design. From an epistemological point of view, the question is whether such arguments can constitute a rational foundation of faith, or even give us knowledge of God. A further question is whether, if God exists, knowledge of God might not also be possible in other ways, for example, on the basis of perception or perhaps mystical experiences. There is also a famous problem casting doubt on the existence of God: Why, if God is an omniscient, omnipotent, and benevolent being, is there evil in the world? Here, the epistemological question is whether, based on this problem, we can know that God (thus conceived) does not exist. Another, central issue for religious epistemology is raised by evidentialism. According to evidentialism, knowledge requires adequate evidence. However, there does not seem to be any adequate evidence of God's existence. Is it possible, then, for theists to endorse evidentialism?

The basic moral categories are those of right and wrong action. When we do theoretical ethics, we wish to find out what it is that makes a right action right and a wrong action wrong. When we do practical or applied ethics, we attempt to find out which actions are right and which are wrong. The epistemological question these areas of philosophy raise is this: How can we know any of that? Traditionally, philosophers have attempted to answer the questions of ethics via intuition, a priori reasoning, and the consideration of hypothetical cases. Some philosophers who belong to the naturalistic camp consider this approach misguided because they think that it is unreliable and liable to produce results that merely reflect our own cultural and social biases. Among those who think that moral knowledge can be acquired via intuition and a priori reasoning, a primary question is whether the kind of justification such methods can generate is coherentist or foundationalist. Finally, a further important question is whether moral knowledge is at all possible. Knowledge requires truth and thus objective reality. According to anti-realists, there is no objective reality of, and thus no truth about, moral matters. Since what is known must be true, it is not easy to see how, if anti-realism were correct, there could be knowledge of moral matters.

When we conceive of epistemology as including knowledge and justified belief as they are positioned within a particular social and historical context, epistemology becomes social epistemology. How to pursue social epistemology is a matter of controversy. According to some, it is an extension and reorientation of traditional epistemology with the aim of correcting its overly individualistic orientation. According to others, social epistemology ought to amount to a radical departure from traditional epistemology, which they see, like the advocates of radical naturalization, as a futile endeavor. Those who favor the former approach retain the thought that knowledge and justified belief are essentially linked to truth as the goal of our cognitive practices. They hold that there are objective norms of rationality that social epistemologists should aspire to articulate. Those who prefer the more radical approach would reject the existence of objective norms of rationality. Moreover, since many view scientific facts as social constructions, they would deny that the goal of our intellectual and scientific activities is to find facts. Such constructivism, if weak, asserts the epistemological claim that scientific theories are laden with social, cultural, and historical presuppositions and biases; if strong, it asserts the metaphysical claim that truth and reality are themselves socially constructed.

Metaethics is the attempt to understand the metaphysical, epistemological, semantic, and psychological, presuppositions and commitments of moral thought, talk, and practice. As such, it counts within its domain a broad range of questions and puzzles, including: Is morality more a matter of taste than truth? Are moral standards culturally relative? Are there moral facts? If there are moral facts, what is their origin? How is it that they set an appropriate standard for our behavior? How might moral facts be related to other facts (about psychology, happiness, human conventions...)? And how do we learn about the moral facts, if there are any? These questions lead naturally to puzzles about the meaning of moral claims as well as about moral truth and the justification of our moral commitments. Metaethics explores as well the connection between values, reasons for action, and human motivation, asking how it is that moral standards might provide us with reasons to do or refrain from doing as it demands, and it addresses many of the issues commonly bound up with the nature of freedom and its significance (or not) for moral responsibility.



Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
The range of issues, puzzles and questions that fall within metaethics purview are consistently abstract. They reflect the fact that metaethics involves an attempt to step back from particular substantive debates within morality to ask about the views, assumptions, and commitments that are shared by those who engage in the debate. By and large, the metaethical issues that emerge as a result of this process of stepping back can be addressed without taking a particular stand on substantive moral issues that started the process. In fact, metaethics has seemed to many to offer a crucial neutral background against which competing moral views need to be seen if they are to be assessed properly. Some metaethicists early in the twentieth century went so far as to hold that their own work made no substantive moral assumptions at all and had no practical implications. Whether any view that is recognizably still a view about the nature and status of ethics could manage this is dubious. But there is no doubt that, whatever metaethics's substantive assumptions and practical implications might be, it involves reflecting on the presuppositions and commitments of those engaging in moral thought, talk, and practice and so abstracting away from particular moral judgments.

Such reflection quickly reveals the extent to which various aspects of morality might reasonably be seen as both intellectually and practically problematic. On the intellectual side, many have worried that there is no good way to vindicate the assumptions and commitments of morality. A careful and clear-eyed study of morality will reveal, some argue, that morality is a myth; others argue that the various principles that are presented as authoritative standards for all are actually merely expressions of emotion or projections of the idiosyncratic attitudes of those advocating the principles; still others argue that in some other way morality is not what it pretends to be and not what it needs to be if it is to be legitimate. On the practical side, many have pressed the difficulty of getting people to judge themselves and others impartially; others have worried that, while we have an interest in convincing others to conform to morality, we ourselves rarely have any reason, really, to conform; still others have thought that the sort of freedom morality assumes is not available to humans as they actually are.

Of course these worries and arguments regularly find counterparts on the other side, with people maintaining that, properly understood, morality is no myth, that its pretensions can be vindicated, that we have all the reason we need to embrace morality and meet its demands, and that people, at least some people under some circumstances, have whatever sort of freedom it is that morality might require.

None of the arguments, on either side, can go quickly or easily. They all depend, first, on identifying and defending the presuppositions and commitments one takes to be at issue and then, second, on showing that they either cannot, or can, be defended. What is at stake is, at least, an understanding of what is an important part of most peoples lives, but there is potentially a lot more at stake to the extent the presuppositions and commitments people take for granted turn out to be suspect. For then, not only will our understanding of that part of our lives be compromised, our sense that it is important may well disappear as well.

Despite the abstract and deeply controversial nature of metaethics, its central concerns arise naturally — perhaps even inevitably — as one reflects critically on one's own moral convictions. So it is no surprise that, in Plato's Republic, Polemarchus claim that being a just person enhances one's life developed quickly into a decidedly metaethical discussion of the origin and nature of justice. Early in Book I, for instance, Thrasymachus defends the idea that justice is whatever is in the interest of the stronger, arguing that morality is a human creation designed by the rich and powerful to control and exploit others. A myth for the weak-minded, arranged for the advantage of a few, justice imposes burdens most have reason to set aside. So Thrasymachus argues. Glaucon follows up, in Book II, with an alternative, and less cynical, proposal. While he too sees morality as a human creation, he sees it as a salutary solution to the serious problems we would otherwise face. He argues that people naturally find themselves unable successfully to ensure that their own wills will rule while, simultaneously, being subject regularly to the will of others. The principles of justice are, he thinks, reasonably introduced and enforced by all as a good way to ensure peace and stability in society. Socrates, in contrast, rejects the idea that justice is a human invention and argues instead that justice provides independent and eternal standards against which human practices, conventions, and institutions can be judged. These different views will likely have implications for what value justice might have. At the same time, though, accepting one or the other view of the nature of justice is compatible with a range of substantive views about what, specifically, justice consists in and about its value.

According to many, Socrates's position fits well with morality's pretensions. It fits well also with the thought that whatever standards humans might put in place are, one and all, liable to moral criticism. Of course, Socrates's position brings along a suite of puzzles concerning the nature of these transcendent standards. What is their origin and from where do they derive their authority?

Many have thought the right answers to these questions are found in an appeal to God. On their view, moral principles are the expression of God's will — they are His commands to us — and they get their authority from their source. In important ways, though, this merely shifts the puzzles back a step. Whatever problems one might have making sense of eternal transcendent standards re-emerge when trying to make sense of an eternal transcendent being who might issue commands. And, as Plato emphasized in Euthyphro, one is also left with the difficulty of explaining why God's commands are authoritative.

One plausible answer might be that God's perfect knowledge of right and wrong, or God's own moral perfection, explains why his commands serve legitimately as standards for us. But that answer assumes that standards of morality exist independently of God's will (either as objects of his knowledge or as standards in light of which He counts as morally perfect), in which case speaking of morality as consisting of God's commands will not explain the origin or nature of these independently existing standards.

Alternatively, one might eschew an appeal to God's knowledge or goodness and claim that there is no independent standard for God's will and nature. But that leaves in place the puzzle concerning the authority of moral principles. If we reject the idea that God's commands reflect His knowledge of right and wrong, and reject as well the idea that God is all good, it seems reasonable to wonder why his commands have any special authority.

One might here point to God's power to punish or to His role in our creation. But neither consideration seems to establish legitimate authority on its own. In general, at least, the mere fact that one has the power to enforce one's commands does not establish those commands as legitimate, nor does it ensure that one has a right to punish those who fail to conform to one's commands. Similarly, in general, the mere fact that one created something does not establish that one properly has absolute control over what one has created. Of course, room remains to argue that there is something special about God's power, or about His role as creator, that makes his commands distinctively legitimate. What is needed is an account of what is special. And, in this context, it needs to be an account that explains how God's commands, as opposed to the commands that others might issue, have an authority. Moreover, if appealing to God is to solve the metaethical puzzle posed by Euthyphro, the account offered must not itself rely on, or presuppose, the sort of transcendent standards we have been attempting to explain.

One appealing feature of Glaucon's account of morality as a mutually advantageous convention is that it renders morality's origin and nature non-mysterious. Moral facts, on this sort of view, emerge as no more puzzling than facts about what is legal or polite. In each case, the standing of some behavior (as moral, or legal, or polite) depends on its conforming to, or conflicting with, various standards that have been put in place. Glaucon's account also makes clear why it is that people might care deeply about morality's demands (even as they are, in their own cases, tempted to violate them when they believe they can with impunity), since the relevant conventions are mutually advantageous.

Yet conventionalist views such as Glaucon's have real difficulties fitting with the common idea that the fundamental principles of morality are universal. Conventions, after all, are contingent creations that differ from place to place and come in to, and go out of, existence. Moreover, conventions seem liable to arbitrariness in ways that threaten to undermine their claim to authority unless they are recognized (at least implicitly) as satisfying some convention-independent standard. That some convention demands something seems to provide reason to conform to the demand only when the convention is, itself, just or reasonable, or in some other way good. And this suggests that, to whatever extent specific moral rules and principles are products of convention, their claim to authority relies on some standards that are not products of convention.

Needless to say, these considerations are not decisive, and those who see morality as a kind of convention have a variety of plausible ways to address the worries mentioned above. As a result, the view remains attractive. Still, many — even many who think an appeal to convention is essential to making sense of morality — think that the proper account of morality cannot be a matter of conventions all the way down. But that does not mean that they think that the standards that serve to justify the demands of (some) conventions are mysterious. Some, for instance, argue that what makes a convention good, and so serves to justify its demands, is its contribution to overall happiness, while others see the measure of conventions in their ability to advance the interests of each considered singly, and still others maintain that the value of conventions is found in their capacity to secure the approval of those who consider them impartially. On all such accounts, value is convention-independent, but it is nonetheless metaphysically non-mysterious. Each of these accounts portrays value as, at bottom, a familiar, completely natural, feature of the world. Moreover, while (on these accounts) particular claims concerning value will prove hard to establish and controversial, there is no special puzzle about what we would be trying to discover or what would count as relevant evidence.

All of these views, conventionalist and not, identify various moral properties with non-problematic natural features of the world. As a result, they are commonly characterized as versions of naturalism and are contrasted with non-naturalist views that see morality as presupposing, or being committed to, properties over and above those that would be countenanced by natural science. Non-naturalism comes with two distinctive burdens: (i) accounting for how the realm of moral properties fits in with familiar natural properties and (ii) explaining how it is that we are able to learn anything about these moral properties. Naturalism, in contrast, avoids these metaphysical and epistemological burdens.

Despite its advantages, naturalism has difficulty capturing well what people take to be the true nature of morality. In saying something is good or right or virtuous we seem to be saying something more than, or at least different from, what we would be saying in describing it as having certain natural features. Correspondingly, no amount of empirical investigation seems by itself, without some moral assumption(s) in play, sufficient to settle a moral question.

David Hume seemed to have these points in mind when he observed that an ought cannot be derived from an is. There is substantial debate about just what Hume meant, and similarly substantial debate as well about whether he was right. But at least part of Hume's concern seems to have been that no set of claims about plain matters of fact (is claims) entail any evaluative claims (ought claims). That is, he seems to have thought, that one can infer the latter from the former only if, in addition to premises concerning plain matters of fact, one has on hand as well at least one evaluative premise. If, for instance, one infers from the fact that someone is feeling pain that something bad is happening, one is at least presupposing that pain is bad. And that presupposition, in turn, is not entailed by any claims concerned solely with plain matters of fact. If Hume is right, every valid argument for an evaluative conclusion either includes or presupposes some evaluative premise. And, as a result, there is no value neutral argument for an evaluative conclusion.

Coming at the same issues from a different direction, G. E. Moore argued (at the beginning of the twentieth century) that no naturalist account of morality could do justice to what we are actually thinking and claiming when we make moral judgments. Moore had in mind a variety of naturalist views that, at the time, had come to be seen as, on balance, the most attractive accounts of the nature of morality. While these views differed among themselves as to what goodness, rightness, virtue and justice might consist in, they shared a commitment to seeing morality as a wholly natural phenomenon and they all saw moral judgment as a matter of thinking that actions, institutions, or characters had some particular natural property or other. According to these views, moral properties were to be identified with some natural property or other (e.g. with what is pleasant, or what satisfies someone's desire, or what conforms to social rules that are in force).

Considering specifically views that identified goodness either with pleasure or with being the object of a desire one desires to have, Moore maintained that such views confused the property goodness with some other property that good things might happen to have. In support of his claim, Moore offered a simple test. Take whichever account you will — say, one according to which to be good is to be pleasant — and then consider whether a person who understands the terms involved might nonetheless intelligibly ask whether something she acknowledges to be pleasant is good. It seems she could. And it seems too that in asking the question she would not then be revealing any kind of conceptual confusion or incompetence. The question is, as Moore put it, a genuinely open one. But then we must grant that to think something is pleasant is not identical to thinking it good. Otherwise, wondering whether something that is, admittedly, pleasant, is good would be as senseless as wondering whether a given pleasant thing was pleasant. If, though, to think something good is different than thinking it pleasant, such thoughts (Moore assumed) must involve attributing distinct properties.

Moore was quick to point out that granting that the question is open, in the sense his argument supposes, is compatible with discovering that, as a matter of fact, everything that is pleasant is also good. Moore's point is that the question is not settled — not closed — on conceptual grounds (whereas it would be if thinking something good were just a matter of thinking it pleasant). Because analogous questions remain open for all the candidate naturalist proposals, Moore argued that no such proposal could legitimately be defended as a conceptual truth and that they all failed to capture accurately what we are thinking in thinking of something that it is good.

Moore's argument had a tremendous impact, striking most people at the time as decisive. As a result, non-naturalism got a new lease on life with a number of people working in metaethics trying to articulate, systematize, and defend accounts of morality that resisted the temptation to identify moral properties with natural properties. Much of the attention was given, by those who have come to be called intuitionists, to defending the idea that moral knowledge, while not based on our senses and on the empirical data we might collect, was nonetheless on as secure a footing as, say, our knowledge of mathematics or of the fundamental concepts (of, say, causation and necessity) that play crucial roles in science. Much of the work in metaethics pursued a strategy of finding companions in guilt, of showing that the status of moral properties as non-natural and the attendant implications for what we must suppose about the nature of moral evidence, if we are to take ourselves as having any, did not leave morality any worse off than other respected fields of knowledge.

Yet Moore's casual slide from claims about what we are thinking to the nature of the properties we are attributing in thinking as we do, offered an important point of resistance. As Moore saw things, to make a moral claim is to express a distinctive belief (that might be true or false) about how things are. Specifically, it is to express the belief that some course of action, or institution, or character trait had the property of being right, or good, or virtuous. The challenge (Moore assumed) is to figure out what property it is that we are taking a thing to have, in thinking of it as right, or good, or virtuous. And the place to look, he thought, is at the content of our beliefs.

According to many, while Moore's Open Question argument does show that moral thinking is distinctive and should not be treated as part and parcel of thinking about non-moral matters, Moore was wrong in holding that the important difference should be traced to the nature of the properties we are taking things to have. According to some of these critics, Moore's mistake is in thinking we are attributing properties at all, when we think of something as right, or good, or virtuous; according to others, his mistake was in thinking that how we think of a property reveals the true nature of the property.

The first line of criticism emerged soon after Moore first offered his Open Question Argument, with philosophers suggesting that in thinking morally we may well not be attributing properties at all. Agreeing that it was a mistake to see moral claims as attributing natural properties to things, non-cognitivists argue that Moore's mistake was in thinking that moral claims attribute any sort of property to things, and so he was also wrong in thinking that moral claims have propositional content and express genuine beliefs. The Open Question is always open, they argue, not because we are, in making a moral judgment, attributing some non-natural property to things, but because we are not attributing any property at all. We are not saying anything that might be true or false, nor are we expressing a belief. We are doing something altogether different: taking a stand, or expressing an emotion, or prescribing something. On these views, moral judgments express some attitude other than belief and lack the sort of cognitive content that would allow them to be true or false.

From the start non-cognitivists have had an eye on both (i) the non-cognitive attitudes that are expressed in making a moral claim and (ii) what people are doing in making such claims. When focusing on the first, they emphasize that moral terms get their meaning not by their link to beliefs that represent the world as being a certain way, but by their connection to non-cognitive attitudes — e.g., reactions to the way the world is, or desires for how the world might be. Here their attention, in giving an account of the meaning of moral terms is on those terms' conventionally-established connection to certain attitudes. (Of course people can use such a term without actually having the corresponding attitudes, but understanding the term is a matter of seeing that it is a linguistically appropriate way to express the attitude.) When focusing on the second, non-cognitivists emphasize moral language's role as tool for influencing the others. Here their attention is on in claiming that something is, say, wrong, people are consistently not just expressing their opposition to it but telling others not to do it, or working to persuade them not to, or in some other way working to direct action. The two ideas go together naturally, since if the first is right, then it would help explain why people can and do use moral language in the way the second suggests. But the ideas are separable. And many think that the expressivist idea advanced by the first goes to the heart of the matter, while thinking that concentrating on the directive or prescriptive use of moral language can at best be secondary.

Whatever the details, the non-cognitivists share the idea that one can admit that something is pleasant, or the object of a desire, or such that it conforms to some rule in force, and nonetheless not take a stand regarding it, or not have any particular emotion concerning it, or not have any interest in prescribing anything relating to it. The Open Question is open, they hold, precisely because the attitudes expressed by a moral judgment all involve something other than merely believing of something that it has certain features (whether natural or not). At the same time, the non-cognitivists proposals fit well with granting Hume's claim concerning the gap between is and ought: whatever facts one grants, whatever is claims one endorses, there is no logical inconsistency involved in failing to take a relevant stand, or to express a emotion towards it, or to prescribe something related to it. Between the beliefs we might have and the other attitudes we might form, no entailment relations hold at all.

Non-cognitivists, of course, need to explain why it seems so plausible to see moral judgment as an expression of belief and as a matter of attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters. And they need to explain why moral thought seems appropriately subject to the rules of logic, whereas the various attitudes that play central roles in the non-cognitivist accounts all seem to fall outside of that realm. Taking the challenge head-on, recent versions of expressivism, flying the banner of quasi-realism, have taken as a central project explaining, on non-cognitivist foundations, how and why moral language has all the trappings of being cognitivist and realist. These views start with a picture of the world as having neither moral properties nor people believing in moral properties (though they have other beliefs), and then explain how a practice of thinking and talking about moral properties, moral beliefs, moral truth, and moral facts, might naturally and properly emerge. The central idea is that we can see our thought and talk as fundamentally a matter of our expressing our affective attitudes or commitments which gives rise to legitimate thought and talk about corresponding properties, beliefs, truths and facts. Two moves underwrite this idea. One is to hold that talk of properties, beliefs, truths and facts comes cheap: Once one holds sincerely that Lying is wrong, no additional commitments come with adding Lying has the property of being wrong or I believe that lying is wrong or It is true that lying is wrong or that It is a fact that lying is wrong. These are all, in effect, just different ways of saying the same thing. And if, in the first place, sincerely saying Lying is wrong is a matter of expressing an attitude or a commitment then so too are these alternative ways of saying the same thing. The second move that underwrites quasi-realism is that the question of whether the cognitivist and realist sounding discourse is legitimate is, itself, an evaluative question judged in light of one's attitudes and commitments. There is, on this view, no independent standard of, say, matching the world that one can deploy without, in choosing that standard, expressing one's attitudes and commitments.

Various versions of non-cognitivism, and in particular versions of quasi-realist expressivism, remain among the most attractive ways of resisting the non-naturalist implications of Moore's Open Question Argument. But they are not the only option. Many argue that, while Moore's argument shows that thinking something is good is different than thinking it is pleasant (or the object of a desire, or such as to conform to some norm that is in force), it does not show that being good is different from being pleasant (or the object of a desire, or such as to conform to some norm that is in force). After all, they point out, thinking that some liquid is H2O is different from thinking it is water and one might intelligibly wonder whether what one grants to be water really is H2O. Yet that does not show that being water is anything other than being H20. Far from it. A difference between the thoughts does not establish a difference in the properties. Thus, for all the Open Question Argument shows, it might turn out that a naturalist account of the nature of moral properties is correct. The naturalist account cannot be defended simply as a conceptual truth but it also cannot be rejected, as Moore thought it could be, as obviously confusing one property (the natural property) for another one (the moral property). This sort of cognitivism has no trouble explaining why it seems so plausible to see moral judgment as an expression of belief and as a matter of attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters. Moral judgments are in fact, on this sort of account, the expression of belief and they do involve attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters (though the account holds that the true nature of the property being attributed is something that might come as a surprise to some). Similarly, this sort of cognitivism can explain why moral thought seems appropriately subject to the rules of logic: it seems appropriately subject to these rules because it is. Problems emerge, however, when it comes to explaining the apparently distinctive nature of moral thinking. If thinking that something is good or right is a matter of attributing to the thing some natural property or other, then what explains the apparently distinctive nature of moral thought?

Cognitivists and non-cognitivists face a common challenge: to account for the nature of moral thought and talk that simultaneously does justice to its distinctive nature without failing to appreciate the significant ways in which it is continuous with non-moral thought and talk. Cognitivism has a relatively easy time accommodating the continuity between moral and non-moral thought and talk, but, especially when combined with naturalism, it faces a real challenge in marking the distinctive nature of moral thought and talk; non-cognitivism has no trouble making room for the distinctive nature of moral thought and talk, but it has trouble accommodating the continuity.

What has always been attractive about Moorean non-naturalism is its capacity to combine the continuity and the difference into a coherent picture. There is room, at least, to account for moral thought's continuity with other thought by emphasizing that it is all a matter of attributing properties (albeit different properties) to things; and there is room too for locating the distinctive nature of moral thought in the putatively authoritative standing of the properties attributed. Of course leaving room for an account is not the same as actually providing one, and Moore himself does not actually offer much at all by way of an explanation of the normative authority (as we might call it) of moral properties. In any case, what has always been troubling about Moore's view is that the coherent picture that emerges seems to presuppose (i) the existence of metaphysically dubious properties that fall outside the causal nexus and, so, are such that (ii) it would be a complete mystery how we could every reliably learn anything about them, if they were to exist. Moore, and the intuitionists who followed him, work in various ways to address these concerns. Error theorists, in contrast, hold that the coherent picture painted by Moore is, at least roughly, the right account of what moral thought and talk involves, but they go on to argue that the metaphysically and epistemically troubling implications of that picture properly undermine its credibility. They argue that we have compelling reasons to reject the presuppositions of moral thought.

The error theorists position regarding morality is the counterpart, with respect to moral thought, of the atheist's position with respect to views concerning God's will and ways. In both cases, the suggestion is that the thoughts at issue involve a mistake or a failed presupposition, and that, because of this, they cannot be true. The error theorist's position, it is worth noting, requires establishing two claims that have each met a lot of resistance: that moral thought really has the presuppositions the error theorist supposes and that those presuppositions are as untenable as the error theorist maintains. At the same time, though, anyone who hopes to vindicate moral thought has the burden of showing that its actual presuppositions and implications are, after all, defensible.

Anyone mounting such a defense needs to offer some account of how it is we might successfully justify one set of moral judgments as over against others. When we turn to morality, what counts as good grounds for holding one view rather than other? What sort of evidence might be available? If Hume and Moore are right, no evidence that appeals solely to non-evaluative considerations will be sufficient (unless we presuppose some principle of inference that connects non-moral premises to moral conclusions). But if we need to rely on evaluative premises or principles in order to infer substantive moral conclusions from non-moral premises (e.g. non-moral premises regarding the impact of a course of action on pleasure or on the satisfaction of human interests), the question immediately arises, How might we justify these evaluative premises or principles?

One answer often offered is that, at a suitably abstract level, there are premises or principles that everyone in fact accepts. Perhaps Murder is wrong, or pain is bad, or everyone should be treated equally, would qualify. But of course such claims hardly do much work since questions immediately arise about which killings constitute murder and about how different pains should be compared and about which way of treating people counts as treating them equally in the relevant way. No moral claim that is plausibly offered as actually accepted by all, or nearly all, people can possibly be substantive enough to help settle on one view rather than another as better justified.

One might, in light of this, offer a more substantive principle, not as one that people actually all accept, but as one that they are all, in fact, committed to (though they may not realize it). This strategy offers the prospect of identifying a principle rich enough in content to serve as the justifying ground for other moral judgments. Yet it requires showing how the principle(s) identified work to justify the more specific judgments they are meant to support. Moreover, one who takes this approach needs also to justify the claim that people are actually committed to the principle in the first place. And this raises the suspicion that claiming there are certain principles to which everyone is committed simply relocates the original challenge, without actually meeting it.

In any case, even if there are suitably substantive principles to which people are committed, and this can be shown, and even if there is a way to establish as well that the principles in question would (if right) actually justify more specific moral judgments, one might understandably worry about the status of the resulting structure. Why not think of it as a castle in the sky, a structure with no appropriate foundation? After all, the fact that we happen to accept, or are committed to accepting, some principle, seems a long way from showing that the principle is true or right.

Our moral judgments (about particular cases as well as about general principles) seem to float disconcertingly free from our normal sources of evidence concerning the nature of the world. We cannot see, touch, taste, or smell value or rightness or virtue, even as we can see, touch, taste, or smell some of the things that have value or that are right or that manifest virtue. So how do we learn about value and rightness and virtue themselves? What grounds do we have for thinking our various moral judgments link up appropriately with what they are judgments of?

Of course moral judgments are not the only judgments that face such a challenge. Many mathematical, modal, and religious judgments face a similar challenge. They all apparently concern matters that are not directly available to the senses and that are, in various ways, mysterious. That establishes some companions in guilt, but also provides the hope that reasonable accounts of how we might learn (or not) about numbers, possibility and necessity, and God, might provide insight into the evidence (if any) we are able to secure concerning morality.

It is worth emphasizing that positive theories of moral epistemology are inevitably bound up with accounts of the nature of moral judgment and their metaphysical presuppositions and commitments. On some accounts, there is nothing to know and so no need for an epistemological theory at all. On others, a proper understanding of moral judgments will reveal that justifying them is of a piece with justifying other judgments for which we have, or hope to have, a plausible epistemology, so the epistemology of morality will be continuous with epistemological theories of other domains. On still other accounts, moral judgments are such that only a sui generis epistemology would make sense of our capacity to acquire moral knowledge. No matter which of these options one takes, epistemological skepticism looms as a real possibility. And in the first case, where there is by implication nothing to know, it does not merely loom, it arrives inevitably. Even if one succeeds in developing a positive theory of moral epistemology in light of which moral knowledge might be possible, the substantive challenge of showing that knowledge has actually been secured remains formidable.

At the same time, much of morality seems clearly a matter of knowing how — how to respond to the need of others, how to respond to threats, how to carry oneself in various situations — and not primarily (if at all) a matter of knowing that something is the case. No doubt, focusing on knowing how, rather than knowing that, does not address skepticism concerning the claims we might make as to which know how is morally significant. But paying attention to the degree to which people count as moral (or immoral) not because of what they say or believe, but because of how they act, is important to appreciating both the nature of morality and what all a plausible account of moral knowledge must encompass.

Among morality's distinctive features, all agree, is its apparently intimate connection to action. In making moral judgments, for instance, we seem to be making a claim that, if true, establishes that someone or other has a reason to act or be a certain way. This marks an important difference between moral claims and claims concerning, say, color. The claim that something is red is, even if true, only contingently connected to whether anyone has any reason at all to act or be a certain way. Whereas if a certain thing is morally good it seems that everyone necessarily has at least some reason (perhaps overrideable or defeasible, but still some reason) to promote, pursue, protect, or respect it — at least if they recognize that it is good. Moreover, many have thought, to judge sincerely that something is good (whether or not one is right) is to have some motivation (again, perhaps overrideable or defeasible, but still some motivation) to promote, pursue, protect, or respect it.

Thus there seem to be necessary connections between moral properties and reasons and also between moral judgments and motivations. Some have thought as well that there is a necessary connection between moral judgments and reasons, such that if one judges that something is good or right then (whether one is right or not) one had a reason to act or be a certain way. Others have thought that there is a connection, again, a necessary connection, between there being a reason for someone to act or be a certain way and that person being, or at least being able to be, motivated in a certain way. This last suggestion, that (say) one can have reason to do only what one might be motivated to do, has implications as well for what might count as good, if something is good only if one has a reason to act in a certain way with respect to it.

Each of these supposed necessary connections is controversial and yet each has plausibly been taken to be at the heart of what is distinctive about morality. At the same time, different proposed connections fit more or less well with different accounts of morality and at least some of the supposed connections are flat out incompatible with some of the accounts. Thus those versions of non-cognitivism that see making a moral judgment as a matter of expressing some motivating attitude have an easier time explaining the internal connection (if there is one) between sincerely making a moral judgment and having an appropriate motive, while certain naturalist cognitivist proposals, for instance those that identify goodness with having the capacity to garner approval from someone who is fully informed, must hold that a person might sincerely judge that something would secure that approval and yet be utterly unmotivated by that fact.

Working through the ways in which a proper appreciation of the relations between morality, reasons, and motivation constrain and inform an account of morality has been a central issue in metaethics. In fact, Glaucon's original proposal concerning the nature of morality (according to which morality is a conventional solution to problems we would otherwise have to face) was introduced as a way of pressing a worry about morality: Morality pretends to provide reason to all, virtue is supposed to be its own reward, and a person is told she should do the right thing because it is right and not because she hopes for some reward, yet, in the face of the demands morality sometimes makes, these claims concerning its nature and value all seem dubious. Specifically, if morality is (as Glaucon's proposal would have it) constituted solely by a set of conventional rules we put in place to secure the benefits we receive from the restraint of others, it looks as if the only reason (and the only motive) we would each have for conforming to the rules would be found in the consequences we hope such compliance would secure. In cases where we could get the benefits without the restraint (as when our failure to restrain ourselves would be undetected) we would have neither reason nor motive not to violate the rules. Thus, if Glaucon is right about the nature of morality, then morality (properly understood) would only provide reason to some, under some circumstances, not reason to all, always. Moreover, virtue would not be its own reward. And morality would not be such that it would make sense for a person to do the right thing (as defined by the rules in place) for its own sake, since the sole value of the relevant rules is found in the benefits that come from others complying with those rules.

Glaucon's ultimate aim was to get from Socrates an account of morality that — unlike his own — would serve to vindicate morality's pretensions. He assumed that if no such account was forthcoming morality's claim on our allegiance would have been undermined even as we might continue to have our own reasons for perpetuating the myth and for working to see that others comply with its rules. Much of the Republic is then given over to Socrates attempt to develop first an account of the nature of morality (specifically, of justice) and then, second, to arguing that being moral is valuable regardless of the consequences. Socrates' concern, in showing that being moral is valuable, is to show specifically that it is valuable to the person who is moral, that the virtuous person, and not just others, benefits from her virtue. Indeed, he tries to show that being moral is so valuable to the person who is moral, that whatever the consequences of injustice might be, however great the rewards, they could never be valuable enough to outweigh the loss of one's virtue.

Socrates own account of the metaphysical and epistemological underpinnings of his view (his appeal to eternal, non-physical Platonic Forms and to our intellectual access to those Forms) commits him unmistakably to non-naturalism and to something like intuitionism. Yet his account of the nature of justice and the specific features of justice that he takes to establish its value, all appeal to considerations that are as available to a naturalist as to a non-naturalist.

In any case, the question underlying Glaucon's concern — Why should I be moral? — has consistently been at the center of attempts to explain the connection between morality and what we have reason to do. Some have argued that the question is misplaced, at least if it assumes there must be some non-moral reason to be moral. Others have held that the question is easily answered on the grounds that the fact that some action is morally required, for instance, entails that one has reason to do it. And still others have maintained that the question presses the single most important challenge to morality's legitimacy, since morality's claim on our allegiance depends on our having reason to comply with its demands, yet explaining why we might have those reasons is extraordinarily difficult.

Whatever view one ends up adopting concerning the connections that hold (or do not hold) among moral properties, moral judgments, reasons for action, and effective motivations, no account is plausible as a vindication of morality unless it makes sense of how and why moral considerations might properly figure in practical deliberation that results in decision and action. Doing this successfully is, in principle, compatible with thinking moral properties do not always provide reasons, compatible too with holding that moral judgments some times fail to motivate, and, finally, compatible as well with the idea that one might have a reason to perform some action that one has no motivation to perform. Of course, these various views are each themselves quite controversial and involve rejecting what others have thought to be necessary truths.

Making sense of how moral considerations might figure in practical deliberation is especially important when it comes to explaining when and why people are responsible for what they do or fail to do. Some of that explanatory job is a matter of moral theory, not metaethics, and involves figuring out what counts as good excuses, legitimate justifications, and appropriate burdens. A theory of moral responsibility inevitably relies on substantive moral theory.

Yet there are important metaethical issues bound up in giving an account of moral responsibility. They emerge most sharply as one considers the nature and significance of free will. Does responsibility presuppose free will? If so, when does someone count as having a free will? It cannot merely be a matter of her will being uncaused. After all, a person whose will was utterly random, responsive neither to her nor to the reasons she had for doing things, would be a person no freer (in the relevant sense) than a person whose will was fully and directly controlled by someone else as a puppeteer might control a puppet. What would it take for her will to count as appropriately responsive, either to her or to her reasons? Is this appropriate responsiveness a matter of being undetermined or of being determined by the right things or in the right way? In any case, if one has the sort of free will that moral responsibility requires (whatever that turns out to be) how are we to understand the connection between the will, and what influences it, on the one hand, and the various psychological and physical causes that apparently determine the behavior that is identified as the action one performs willingly, on the other? How do agents with a free will fit within a natural world?

Not surprisingly, the range of answers that have been offered to these questions covers an exceedingly broad spectrum. Some hold that moral responsibility requires a certain kind of freedom and then argue that we lack that sort of freedom or, alternatively, that we at least sometimes have it. Others, though, maintain that freedom is irrelevant and that holding people morally responsible makes sense only if we see their wills as determined. And others identify a truly free will not with a will that is undetermined, but with one that is determined by reason. And still others argue that the right understanding of moral responsibility will show that metaphysical questions concerning the nature of the will are irrelevant.

The history of moral theory is a history of attempts to identify, articulate, and defend general moral principles that serve to explain when and why various types of action, institutions, or characters count as right or wrong, just or unjust, virtuous or vicious. The assumption has consistently been that there is a general and principled account of morality to be given. And this assumption has survived the fact that few people think any particular set of principles that we have actually succeeded in articulating, is fully adequate. What explains the assumption? Why not hold, as particularists do, that there may well be no set of general principles that adequately mark moral distinctions? Or, why not think, as skeptics do, that our repeated failures actually to identify fully adequate principles shows that morality is a chimera?

Wrestling with these questions returns one immediately and directly to wondering about the nature of morality and the role it is supposed to play in human life. What is it about morality's nature, or its role, that would make sense of the idea that general principles are essential to it? Why not suppose that one case of cruelty might be wrong, and another not wrong, without there being any ground that would justify treating them as different? Why is it so natural to suppose that there must be some other difference — say a difference in their consequences, or a difference in what has led up to the act of cruelty — that underwrites and justifies the thought that one is wrong, but not the other? Why not grant that one of the two just happened to be wrong and the other happened not to be? Could not moral properties just happen to have been distributed randomly so that, in the end, there is no justification for one action having a certain moral standing while another, otherwise the same, has a different standing? These suggested possibilities are, I believe, not real possibilities at all. They would each entail that moral demands are fundamentally arbitrary in a way that is incompatible with morality's claim to authority. But what is it about morality that precludes it being fundamentally arbitrary? A good answer, I suspect, will lead one away from the idea that moral properties are merely there in the world to be found, wholly independent of our concerns and practices. But a good answer is needed. And a good answer is not provided simply by supplying, if one could, a consistent and coherent set of principles that successfully systematized particular moral judgments about acts, institutions, and characters. The challenge here is not simply to show that moral judgments can be seen to fit a pattern; the challenge is to show that the pattern they fit — the principle(s) to which they conform — work to explain and justify their importance.

Science is an enormously successful human enterprise. The study of scientific method is the attempt to discern the activities by which that success is achieved. Among the activities often identified as characteristic of science are systematic observation and experimentation, inductive and deductive reasoning, and the formation and testing of hypotheses and theories. How these are carried out in detail can vary greatly, but characteristics like these have been looked to as a way of demarcating scientific activity from non-science, where only enterprises which employ some canonical form of scientific method or methods should be considered science (see also the entry on science and pseudo-science). On the other hand, more recent debate has questioned whether there is anything like a fixed toolkit of methods which is common across science and only science.

Scientific method should be distinguished from the aims and products of science, such as knowledge, predictions, or control. Methods are the means by which those goals are achieved. Scientific method should also be distinguished from meta-methodology, which includes the values and justifications behind a particular characterization of scientific method (i.e., a methodology) — values such as objectivity, reproducibility, simplicity, or past successes. Methodological rules are proposed to govern method and it is a meta-methodological question whether methods obeying those rules satisfy given values. Finally, method is distinct, to some degree, from the detailed and contextual practices through which methods are implemented. The latter might range over: specific laboratory techniques; mathematical formalisms or other specialized languages used in descriptions and reasoning; technological or other material means; ways of communicating and sharing results, whether with other scientists or with the public at large; or the conventions, habits, enforced customs, and institutional controls over how and what science is carried out.

While it is important to recognize these distinctions, their boundaries are fuzzy. Hence, accounts of method cannot be entirely divorced from their methodological and meta-methodological motivations or justifications, Moreover, each aspect plays a crucial role in identifying methods. Disputes about method have therefore played out at the detail, rule, and meta-rule levels. Changes in beliefs about the certainty or fallibility of scientific knowledge, for instance (which is a meta-methodological consideration of what we can hope for methods to deliver), have meant different emphases on deductive and inductive reasoning, or on the relative importance attached to reasoning over observation (i.e., differences over particular methods.) Beliefs about the role of science in society will affect the place one gives to values in scientific method.

The issue which has shaped debates over scientific method the most in the last half century is the question of how pluralist do we need to be about method? Unificationists continue to hold out for one method essential to science; nihilism is a form of radical pluralism, which considers the effectiveness of any methodological prescription to be so context sensitive as to render it not explanatory on its own. Some middle degree of pluralism regarding the methods embodied in scientific practice seems appropriate. But the details of scientific practice vary with time and place, from institution to institution, across scientists and their subjects of investigation. How significant are the variations for understanding science and its success? How much can method be abstracted from practice? This entry describes some of the attempts to characterize scientific method or methods, as well as arguments for a more context-sensitive approach to methods embedded in actual scientific practices.

This entry could have been given the title Scientific Methods and gone on to fill volumes, or it could have been extremely short, consisting of a brief summary rejection of the idea that there is any such thing as a unique Scientific Method at all. Both unhappy prospects are due to the fact that scientific activity varies so much across disciplines, times, places, and scientists that any account which manages to unify it all will either consist of overwhelming descriptive detail, or trivial generalizations.

The choice of scope for the present entry is more optimistic, taking a cue from the recent movement in philosophy of science toward a greater attention to practice: to what scientists actually do. This turn to practice can be seen as the latest form of studies of methods in science, insofar as it represents an attempt at understanding scientific activity, but through accounts that are neither meant to be universal and unified, nor singular and narrowly descriptive. To some extent, different scientists at different times and places can be said to be using the same method even though, in practice, the details are different.

Whether the context in which methods are carried out will be at all relevant, or to what extent it will be so, will depend largely on what one takes the aims of science to be and what ones own aims are. For most of the history of scientific methodology the assumption has been that the most important output of science is knowledge and so the aim of methodology should be to discover those methods by which scientific knowledge is generated.

Science was seen to embody the most successful form of reasoning (but which form?) to the most certain knowledge claims (but how certain?) on the basis of systematically collected evidence (but what counts as evidence and, in particular, should the evidence of the senses or rather of rational insight take precedence?) Section 2 surveys some of the history, pointing to two major themes. One theme is seeking the right balance between observation and reasoning (and the attendant forms of reasoning which employ them); the other is how certain scientific knowledge is or can be.

Section 3 turns to 20th century debates on scientific method. In the second half of the 20th century the epistemic privilege of science faced several challenges and many philosophers of science abandoned the reconstruction of the logic of scientific method. Views changed significantly regarding which functions of science ought to be captured and why. For some, the success of science was better identified with social or cultural features. Historical and sociological turns in the philosophy of science were made, with a demand that greater attention be paid to the non-epistemic aspects of science, such as sociological, institutional, material, and political factors. Even outside of those movements there was an increased specialization in the philosophy of science, with more and more focus on specific fields within science. The combined upshot was very few philosophers arguing any longer for a grand unified methodology of science. Sections 3 and 4 surveys the main positions on scientific method in 20th century philosophy of science, focusing on where they differ in their preference for confirmation or falsification or for waiving the idea of a special scientific method altogether.

As these sections illustrate, the question of method is still central to the discourse about science. Scientific method remains a topic for education, for science policy, and among scientists. It arises in the public domain where the demarcation of science is at issue. Some philosophers have recently returned, therefore, to the question of what it is that makes science a unique cultural product. This entry will close with some of these recent attempts at discerning and encapsulating the activities by which scientific knowledge is achieved.

Attempting a history of scientific method compounds the vast scope of the topic. This section briefly surveys the background to modern methodological debates. What can be called the classical view goes back to antiquity, and represents a point of departure for later divergences.

We begin with a point made by Laudan (1968) in his historical survey of scientific method:

Perhaps the most serious inhibition to the emergence of the history of theories of scientific method as a respectable area of study has been the tendency to conflate it with the general history of epistemology, thereby assuming that the narrative categories and classificatory pigeon-holes applied to the latter are also basic to the former. (1968: 5)

To see knowledge about the natural world as falling under knowledge more generally is an understandable conflation. Histories of theories of method would naturally employ the same narrative categories and classificatory pigeon holes. An important theme of the history of epistemology, for example, is the unification of knowledge, a theme reflected in the question of the unification of method in science. Those who have identified differences in kinds of knowledge have often likewise identified different methods for achieving that kind of knowledge (see the entry on the unity of science).

Aristotle is recognized as giving the earliest systematic treatise on the nature of scientific inquiry in the western tradition, one which embraced observation and reasoning about the natural world. In the Prior and Posterior Analytics, Aristotle reflects first on the aims and then the methods of inquiry into nature. A number of features can be found which are still considered by most to be essential to science. For Aristotle, empiricism, careful observation (but passive observation, not controlled experiment), is the starting point, though the aim is not merely recording of facts. Science (epistêmê), for Aristotle, is a body of properly arranged knowledge or learning—the empirical facts, but also their ordering and display are of crucial importance. The aims of discovery, ordering, and display of facts partly determine the methods required of successful scientific inquiry. Also determinant is the nature of the knowledge being sought, and the explanatory causes proper to that kind of knowledge (see the discussion of the four causes in the entry on Aristotle on causality).

In addition to careful observation, then, scientific method requires a logic as a system of reasoning for properly arranging, but also inferring beyond, what is known by observation. Methods of reasoning may include induction, prediction, or analogy, among others. Aristotles system (along with his catalogue of fallacious reasoning) was collected under the title the Organon. This title would be echoed in later works on scientific reasoning, such as Novum Organon by Francis Bacon, and Novum Organon Restorum by William Whewell (see below). In the Organon reasoning is divided primarily into two forms, a rough division which persists into modern times. The division, known most commonly today as deductive versus inductive method, appears in other eras and methodologies as analysis/​synthesis, non-ampliative/​ampliative, or even confirmation/​verification. The basic idea is that there are two directions to proceed in our methods of inquiry: one away from what is observed, to the more fundamental, general, and encompassing principles; the other, leads from the fundamental and general to other possible specific instantiations of those principles.

The basic aim and method of inquiry identified here can be seen as a theme running throughout the next two millennia of reflection on the correct way to seek after knowledge: carefully observe nature and then seek rules or principles which explain or predict its operation. The Aristotelian corpus provided the framework for a commentary tradition on scientific method independent of the science itself (its physics and cosmos.) During the medieval period, figures such as Albertus Magnus (1206–1280), Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274), Robert Grosseteste (1175–1253), Roger Bacon (1214/1220–1292), William of Ockham (1287–1347), Andreas Vesalius (1514–1546), Giacomo Zabarella (1533–1589) all worked to clarify the kind of knowledge which could be obtained by observation and induction, the source of justification of induction, and the best rules for its application. Many of their contributions we now think of as essential to science (see also Laudan 1968). As Aristotle and Plato had employed a framework of reasoning either to the forms or away from the forms, medieval thinkers employed directions away from the phenomena or back to the phenomena. In analysis, a phenomena was examined to discover its basic explanatory principles; in synthesis, explanations of a phenomena were constructed from first principles.

During the Scientific Revolution these various strands of argument, experiment, and reason were forged into a dominant epistemic authority. The 16th–18th centuries were a period of not only dramatic advance in knowledge about the operation of the natural world—advances in mechanical, medical, biological, political, economic explanations—but also of self-awareness of the revolutionary changes taking place, and intense reflection on the source and legitimation of the method by which the advances were made. The struggle to establish the new authority included methodological moves. The Book of Nature, according to the metaphor of Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) or Francis Bacon (1561–1626), was written in the language of mathematics, of geometry and number. This motivated an emphasis on mathematical description and mechanical explanation as important aspects of scientific method. Through figures such as Henry More and Ralph Cudworth, a neo-Platonic emphasis on the importance of metaphysical reflection on nature behind appearances, particularly regarding the spiritual as a complement to the purely mechanical, remained an important methodological thread of the Scientific Revolution (see the entries on Cambridge platonists; Boyle; Henry More; Galileo).

In Novum Organum (1620), Bacon was critical of the Aristotelian method for proceeding too quickly and leaping from particulars to universals, largely as dictated by the syllogistic form of reasoning which regularly mixed those two types of propositions. Bacon aimed at the invention of new arts, of principles, of designations and directions for works. His method would be grounded in methodical collection of data and observations, coupled with correction of our senses (and particularly, strictures for the avoidance of the Idols, as he called them, kinds of systematic errors to which naïve observers are prone.) The community of scientists could then climb, by a careful, gradual and unbroken ascent, to reliable general claims.

Bacons method has been criticized as impractical and too inflexible for any living, practicing scientist. Whewell would later criticize Bacon in his System of Logic for paying too little attention to the practices of scientists. It is hard to find convincing examples of Bacons method being put in to practice in the history of science, but there are a few who have been held up as real examples of 16th century scientific, inductive method, even if not in the rigid Baconian mold: figures such as Robert Boyle (1627–1691) and William Harvey (1578–1657) (see the entry on Bacon).

It is to Isaac Newton (1642–1727), however, that historians of science and methodologists have paid the greatest attention, by far. Given the enormous success of his Principia Mathematica and Opticks, this is understandable. The study of Newtons method has had two main thrusts: the implicit method of the experiments and reasoning presented in the Opticks, and the explicit methodological rules given as the Rules for Philosophising (the Regulae) in Book III of the Principia. Newtons law of gravitation, the linchpin of his new cosmology, broke with explanatory conventions of natural philosophy, first for apparently proposing action at a distance, but more generally for not providing true, physical causes. The argument for his System of the World (Principia, Book III) was based on phenomena, not reasoned first principles. This was viewed (mainly on the continent) as insufficient for proper natural philosophy. The Regulae counter this objection, re-defining the aims of natural philosophy by re-defining the method natural philosophers should follow.

Rule I: No more causes of natural things should be admitted than are both true and sufficient to explain their phenomena.
Rule II: Therefore, the causes assigned to natural effects of the same kind must be, so far as possible, the same.
Rule III: Those qualities of bodies that cannot be intended and remitted and that belong to all bodies on which experiments can be made should be taken as qualities of all bodies universally.
Rule IV: In experimental philosophy, propositions gathered from phenomena by induction should be considered either exactly or very nearly true notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses, until yet other phenomena make such propositions either more exact or liable to exceptions.
To his list of methodological prescriptions should be added Newtons famous phrase hypotheses non fingo (commonly translated as I frame no hypotheses.) The scientist was not to invent systems but infer explanations from observations, as Bacon had advocated. This would come to be known as inductivism. In the century after Newton, significant clarifications of the Newtonian method were made. Colin Maclaurin (1698–1746), for instance, reconstructed the essential structure of the method as having complementary analysis and synthesis phases, one proceeding away from the phenomena in generalization, the other from the general propositions to derive explanations of new phenomena. Denis Diderot (1713–1784) and editors of the Encyclopédie did much to consolidate and popularize Newtonianism, as did Francesco Algarotti (1721–1764). The emphasis was often the same, as much on the character of the scientist as on their process, a character which is still commonly assumed. The scientist is humble in the face of nature, not beholden to dogma, obeys only his eyes, and follows the truth wherever it leads. It was certainly Voltaire (1694–1778) and du Chatelet (1706–1749) who were most influential in propagating the latter vision of the scientist and their craft, with Newton as hero. Scientific method became a revolutionary force of the Enlightenment. (See also the entries on Newton, Leibniz, Descartes, Boyle, Hume, enlightenment, as well as Shank 2008 for a historical overview.)

Not all 18th century reflections on scientific method were so celebratory. Famous also are George Berkeleys (1685–1753) attack on the mathematics of the new science, as well as the over-emphasis of Newtonians on observation; and David Humes (1711–1776) undermining of the warrant offered for scientific claims by inductive justification (see the entries on: George Berkeley; David Hume; Humes Newtonianism and Anti-Newtonianism). Humes problem of induction motivated Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) to seek new foundations for empirical method, though as an epistemic reconstruction, not as any set of practical guidelines for scientists. Both Hume and Kant influenced the methodological reflections of the next century, such as the debate between Mill and Whewell over the certainty of inductive inferences in science.

The debate between John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) and William Whewell (1794–1866) has become the canonical methodological debate of the 19th century. Although often characterized as a debate between inductivism and hypothetico-deductivism, the role of the two methods on each side is actually more complex. On the hypothetico-deductive account, scientists work to come up with hypotheses from which true observational consequences can be deduced—hence, hypothetico-deductive. Because Whewell emphasizes both hypotheses and deduction in his account of method, he can be seen as a convenient foil to the inductivism of Mill. However, equally if not more important to Whewells portrayal of scientific method is what he calls the fundamental antithesis. Knowledge is a product of the objective (what we see in the world around us) and subjective (the contributions of our mind to how we perceive and understand what we experience, which he called the Fundamental Ideas). Both elements are essential according to Whewell, and he was therefore critical of Kant for too much focus on the subjective, and John Locke (1632–1704) and Mill for too much focus on the senses. An interesting aspect of Whewells fundamental ideas is that they can be discipline relative. An idea can be fundamental even if it is necessary for knowledge only within a given scientific discipline (e.g., chemical affinity for chemistry). (This distinguishes fundamental ideas from the forms and categories of intuition of Kant. See Whewell entry.)

Clarifying fundamental ideas is therefore an essential part of scientific method and scientific progress. Whewell called this process Discoverers Induction. It was induction, following Bacon or Newton, but Whewell sought to revive Bacons account by emphasising the role of ideas in the clear and careful formulation of inductive hypotheses. Whewells induction is not merely the collecting of objective facts. The subjective plays a role through what Whewell calls the Colligation of Facts, a creative act of the scientist, the invention of a theory. A theory is then confirmed by testing, where more facts are brought under the theory, called the Consilience of Inductions. Whewell felt that this was the method by which the true laws of nature could be discovered: clarification of fundamental concepts, clever invention of explanations, and careful testing. Mill, in his critique of Whewell, and others who have cast Whewell as a fore-runner of the hypothetico-deductivist view, seem to have under-estimated the importance of this discovery phase in Whewells understanding of method (Snyder 1997a,b, 1999). Down-playing the discovery phase would come to characterize methodology of the early 20th century (see section 3).

Mill, in his System of Logic, puts forward instead a narrower view of induction as the essence of scientific method. For Mill, induction is the search first for regularities among events. Among those regularities, some will continue to hold for further observations, eventually gaining the status of laws. One can also look for regularities among the laws discovered in one domain, i.e., for a law of laws. Which law law will hold is time and discipline dependent and should be held open to revision. One example is the Law of Universal Causation, and Mill put forward specific methods for identifying causes—now commonly known as Mills methods. These five methods look for circumstances which are common among the phenomena of interest, those which are absent when the phenomena are, or those for which both vary together. Mills methods are still seen as capturing basic intuitions about experimental methods for finding the relevant explanatory factors (System of Logic (1843), see Mill entry). The methods advocated by Whewell and Mill, in the end, look similar. Both involve induction and generalization to covering laws. They differ dramatically, however, with respect to the necessity of the knowledge arrived at; that is, at the meta-methodological level (see the entries on Whewell and Mill entries).

The quantum and relativistic revolutions in physics in the early 20th century had a profound effect on methodology. The conceptual foundations of both of these physical theories were taken to show the defeasibility of even the most seemingly secure commonsense intuitions about space, time and physical bodies. Certainty of knowledge about the natural world was therefore recognized as unattainable, and instead a renewed empiricism was sought, which rendered science fallible but at the same time rationally justified.

In support of this, analysis of the reasoning of scientists emerged according to which the aspects of scientific method which were of primary importance were the means of testing and confirming of theories. A distinction in methodology was made between the contexts of discovery and of justification. The distinction could be used as a wedge between, on the one hand the particularities of where and how theories or hypotheses are arrived at and, on the other, the underlying reasoning scientists use (whether or not they are aware of it) when assessing theories and judging their adequacy on the basis of the available evidence. By and large, for most of the 20th century, philosophy of science focused on the second context, although philosophers differed on whether to focus on confirmation or refutation as well as on the many details of how confirmation or refutation could or could not be brought about. By the mid-20th century these attempts at defining the method of justification and the context distinction itself came under pressure. During the same period, philosophy of science developed rapidly, and from section 4 this entry will therefore shift from a primarily historical treatment of the scientific method towards a primarily thematic one.

Advances in logic and probability held out promise of the possibility of elaborate reconstructions of scientific theories and empirical methods. The best example of this is Rudolf Carnaps The Logical Structure of the World (1928) Here, Carnap attempted to show that a scientific theory could be understood as a formal axiomatic system—that is, a logic. Insofar as that system referred to the world, it did so because some of its basic sentences could be understood in terms of observations or operations which one could perform to test them. The rest of the theoretical system, including sentences using theoretical or unobservable terms (like electron or force) would then either be meaningful because they could be reduced to observations, or they had purely logical meanings (called analytic, like mathematical identities). This has been referred to as the verifiability criterion of meaning. According to the criterion, any statement not either analytic or verifiable was strictly meaningless. Although the view was endorsed by Carnap in 1928, he would later come to see it as too restrictive (Carnap 1956). Another familiar version of this idea is operationalism of Percy William Bridgman. In The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Bridgman asserted that every physical concept could be defined in terms of the operations one would perform to verify the application of that concept. Making good on the operationalisation of a concept even as simple as length, however, can easily become enormously complex (for measuring very small lengths, for instance) or impractical (measuring large distances like light years.)

Positivism also had to contend with the recognition that a purely inductivist approach, along the lines of Bacon-Newton-Mill, was untenable. There was no pure observation, for starters. All observation was theory laden. Theory is required to make any observation, therefore not all theory can be derived from observation alone. (See also the entry on theory and observation in science). Even granting an observational basis, Hume had already pointed out that one could not argue for inductive conclusions without begging the question by presuming the success of the inductive method. Likewise, positivist attempts at analyzing how a generalization can be confirmed by observations of its instances were subject to a number of criticisms. In his riddle of induction, Goodman (1965) pointed out that for a set of observations, there will be multiple hypotheses that are equally supported. For example, the observation that all emeralds examined before today were green would support equally the two generalization all emeralds are green and all emeralds are grue where x is grue iff either x has been examined before today and is green or x has not been examined before today and is blue. Goodman suggested that one could distinguish between generalizations that were supported by their instances and those that were not by comparing the entrenchment of their predicates—that is, the degree to which they have formed part of generalizations that have successfully been projected to account for new instances. In this way all emeralds are green could be distinguished as more entrenched than all emeralds are grue. In the Raven Paradox, Hempel (1965) pointed out that if an observation confirms a given hypothesis, it also confirms all other hypotheses that are logically equivalent to it. For example, the generalization all ravens are black is logically equivalent to the generalization all non-black objects are non-ravens, and the observation of a black raven, a red herring and a white shoe would therefore all confirm the hypothesis that ravens are black. Many find this paradoxical, but Hempel maintained that our intuition is based on a tacit appeal to background knowledge on the prevalence of ravens and non-ravens that prompt us to give more weight to evidence of ravens being black than to evidence of non-black items being non-ravens. (for more on these points of criticism as well as how they have been met, see the entries on confirmation and the problem of induction). We shall return to more recent attempts at explaining how observations can serve to confirm a scientific theory in section 4 below.

Another approach that took off from the difficulties with inductive inference was Karl Poppers critical rationalism or falsificationism (Popper 1959, 1963). Falsification is deductive and similar to H-D in that it involves scientists deducing observational consequences from the hypothesis under test. For Popper, however, the important point was not whatever confirmation successful prediction offered to the hypotheses but rather the logical asymmetry between such confirmations, which require an inductive inference, versus falsification, which can be based on a deductive inference. This simple opposition was later questioned, by Lakatos, among others. (See the entry on historicist theories of scientific rationality.)

Popper stressed that, regardless of the amount of confirming evidence, we can never be certain that a hypothesis is true without committing the fallacy of affirming the consequent. Instead, Popper introduced the notion of corroboration as a measure for how well a theory or hypothesis has survived previous testing—but without implying that this is also a measure for the probability that it is true.

Popper was also motivated by his doubts about the scientific status of theories like the Marxist theory of history or psycho-analysis, and so wanted to draw a line of demarcation between science and pseudo-science. Popper saw this as an importantly different distinction than demarcating science from metaphysics. The latter demarcation was the primary concern of many logical empiricists. Popper used the idea of falsification to draw a line instead between pseudo and proper science. Science was science because it subjected its theories to rigorous tests which offered a high probability of failing and thus refuting the theory. The aim was not, in this way, to verify a theory. This could be done all too easily, even in cases where observations were at first inconsistent with the deduced consequences of the theory, for example by introducing auxiliary hypotheses designed explicitly to save the theory, so-called ad hoc modifications. This was what he saw done in pseudo-science where the theories appeared to be able to explain anything that happened within the field to which they applied. In contrast, science is risky; if observations showed the predictions from a theory to be absent, the theory would be refuted. Hence, scientific hypotheses must be falsifiable. Not only must there exist some possible observation statement which could falsify the hypothesis or theory, were it observed, (Popper called these the hypothesis potential falsifiers) it is crucial to the Popperian scientific method that such falsifications be sincerely attempted on a regular basis.

The more potential falsifiers of a hypothesis, the more falsifiable it would be, and the more the hypothesis claimed. Conversely, hypotheses without falsifiers claimed very little or nothing at all. Originally, Popper thought that this meant the introduction of ad hoc hypotheses only to save a theory should not be countenanced as good scientific method. These would undermine the falsifiabililty of a theory. However, Popper later came to recognize that the introduction of modifications (immunizations, he called them) was often an important part of scientific development. Responding to surprising or apparently falsifying observations often generated important new scientific insights. Poppers own example was the observed motion of Uranus which originally did not agree with Newtonian predictions, but the ad hoc hypothesis of an outer planet explained the disagreement and led to further falsifiable predictions. Popper sought to reconcile the view by blurring the distinction between falsifiable and not falsifiable, and speaking instead of degrees of testability (Popper 1985: 41f.).

From the 1960s on, sustained meta-methodological criticism emerged that drove the philosophical focus away from scientific method. Something brief about those criticisms must be said here, but recommendations for further reading can be found at the end of the entry.

Thomas Kuhns The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) begins with a well-known shot across the bow for philosophers of science:

History, if viewed as a repository for more than anecdote or chronology, could produce a decisive transformation in the image of science by which we are now possessed. (1962: 1)

The kind of image Kuhn wanted to transform was the a-historical, rational reconstruction sought by many of the Logical Positivists, though Carnap and other positivists were actually quite sympathetic to Kuhns views. (See the entry on the Vienna Circle). Kuhn shares with other of his contemporaries, such as Feyerabend and Lakatos, a commitment to a more empirical approach to philosophy of science. Namely, the history of science provides important data, and necessary checks, for philosophy of science, including any theory of scientific method.

An examination of the history of science reveals, according to Kuhn, that scientific development occurs in alternating phases. During normal science, the members of the scientific community adhere to the paradigm in place. Their commitment to the paradigm means a commitment to the puzzles to be solved and the acceptable ways of solving them. Confidence in the paradigm remains so long as steady progress is made in solving the shared puzzles. Method in this normal phase operates within a disciplinary matrix (Kuhns later concept of a paradigm) which includes standards for problem solving, as well as defines the range of problems the method should be applied to. An important part of a disciplinary matrix is the set of values which provide the norms and aims for scientific method. The main values that Kuhn identifies are prediction, problem solving, simplicity, consistency, and plausibility.

An important by-product of normal science, however, is the accumulation of puzzles which cannot be solved utilizing the resources of the current paradigm. Once the accumulation of these anomalies has reached some critical mass, it can trigger a communal shift to a new paradigm and a new phase of normal science. Importantly, the values that provide the norms and aims for scientific method may have transformed in the meantime. Method may therefore be relative to discipline, time or place

Feyerabend also identified the aims of science as progress, but argued that any methodological prescription would only stifle that progress (Feyerabend 1988). His arguments are grounded in re-examining accepted myths about the history of science. Heroes of science, like Galileo, are shown to be just as reliant on rhetoric and persuasion as they are on reason and demonstration. Others, like Aristotle, are shown to be far more reasonable and far-reaching in their outlooks then they are given credit for. As a consequence, the only rule that could provide what he took to be sufficient freedom was the vacuous anything goes. More generally, even the methodological restriction that science is the best way to pursue knowledge, and to increase knowledge, is too restrictive. Feyerabend suggested instead that science might, in fact, be a threat to a free society, because it and its myth had become so dominant (Feyerabend 1978).

An even more fundamental kind of criticism was offered by several sociologists of science from the 1970s onwards who dismissed what they saw as a false distinction between philosophical accounts of the rational development of science and sociological accounts of the irrational mistakes. Instead, they adhered to a symmetry thesis on which any causal explanation of how scientific knowledge is established needs to be symmetrical in explaining truth and falsity, rationality and irrationality, success and mistakes by the same causal factors (see, e.g., Barnes and Bloor 1982, Bloor 1991). Movements in the Sociology of Science, like the Strong Programme, or in the social dimensions and causes of knowledge more generally led to extended and close examination of detailed case studies in contemporary science and its history. (See the entries on the social dimensions of scientific knowledge and social epistemology.) Well-known examinations by Latour and Woolgar (1979/1986), Knorr-Cetina (1981), Pickering (1984), Shapin and Schaffer (1985) seemed to bear out that it was social ideologies (on a macro-scale) or individual interactions and circumstances (on a micro-scale) which were the primary causal factors in determining which beliefs gained the status of scientific knowledge. As they saw it, in other words, explanatory appeals to scientific method were not empirically well grounded.

By the close of the 20th century the search by philosophers for the scientific method was flagging. Nola and Sankey (2000b) could introduce their volume on method by remarking that For some, the whole idea of a theory of scientific method is yester-years debate ....

Despite the many difficulties that philosophers encountered in trying to providing a clear methodology of conformation (or refutation), still important progress has been made on understanding how observation can provide evidence for a given theory. Work in statistics has been crucial for understanding how theories can be tested empirically, and in recent decades a huge literature has developed that attempts to recast confirmation in Bayesian terms. Here these developments can be covered only briefly, and we refer to the entry on confirmation for further details and references.

Statistics has come to play an increasingly important role in the methodology of the experimental sciences from the 19th century onwards. At that time, statistics and probability theory took on a methodological role as an analysis of inductive inference, and attempts to ground the rationality of induction in the axioms of probability theory have continued throughout the 20th century and in to the present. Developments in the theory of statistics itself, meanwhile, have had a direct and immense influence on the experimental method, including methods for measuring the uncertainty of observations such as the Method of Least Squares developed by Legendre and Gauss in the early 19th century, criteria for the rejection of outliers proposed by Peirce by the mid-19th century, and the significance tests developed by Gosset (a.k.a. Student), Fisher, Neyman & Pearson and others in the 1920s and 1930s (see, e.g., Swijtink 1987 for a brief historical overview; and also the entry on C.S. Peirce).

These developments within statistics then in turn led to a reflective discussion among both statisticians and philosophers of science on how to perceive the process of hypothesis testing: whether it was a rigorous statistical inference that could provide a numerical expression of the degree of confidence in the tested hypothesis, or if it should be seen as a decision between different courses of actions that also involved a value component. This led to a major controversy among Fisher on the one side and Neyman and Pearson on the other (see especially Fisher 1955, Neyman 1956 and Pearson 1955, and for analyses of the controversy, e.g., Howie 2002, Marks 2000, Lenhard 2006). On Fishers view, hypothesis testing was a methodology for when to accept or reject a statistical hypothesis, namely that a hypothesis should be rejected by evidence if this evidence would be unlikely relative to other possible outcomes, given the hypothesis were true. In contrast, on Neyman and Pearsons view, the consequence of error also had to play a role when deciding between hypotheses. Introducing the distinction between the error of rejecting a true hypothesis (type I error) and accepting a false hypothesis (type II error), they argued that it depends on the consequences of the error to decide whether it is more important to avoid rejecting a true hypothesis or accepting a false one. Hence, Fisher aimed for a theory of inductive inference that enabled a numerical expression of confidence in a hypothesis. To him, the important point was the search for truth, not utility. In contrast, the Neyman-Pearson approach provided a strategy of inductive behaviour for deciding between different courses of action. Here, the important point was not whether a hypothesis was true, but whether one should act as if it was.

Similar discussions are found in the philosophical literature. On the one side, Churchman (1948) and Rudner (1953) argued that because scientific hypotheses can never be completely verified, a complete analysis of the methods of scientific inference includes ethical judgments in which the scientists must decide whether the evidence is sufficiently strong or that the probability is sufficiently high to warrant the acceptance of the hypothesis, which again will depend on the importance of making a mistake in accepting or rejecting the hypothesis. Others, such as Jeffrey (1956) and Levi (1960) disagreed and instead defended a value-neutral view of science on which scientists should bracket their attitudes, preferences, temperament, and values when assessing the correctness of their inferences. For more details on this value-free ideal in the philosophy of science and its historical development, see Douglas (2009) and Howard (2003).

In recent decades, philosophical discussions of the evaluation of probabilistic hypotheses by statistical inference have largely focused on Bayesianism that understands probability as a measure of a persons degree of belief in an event, given the available information, and frequentism that instead understands probability as a long-run frequency of a repeatable event. Hence, for Bayesians probabilities refer to a state of knowledge, whereas for frequentists probabilities refer to frequencies of events (see, e.g., Sober 2008, chapter 1 for a detailed introduction to Bayesianism and frequentism as well as to likelihoodism). Bayesianism aims at providing a quantifiable, algorithmic representation of belief revision, where belief revision is a function of prior beliefs (i.e., background knowledge) and incoming evidence. Bayesianism employs a rule based on Bayes theorem, a theorem of the probability calculus which relates conditional probabilities. The probability that a particular hypothesis is true is interpreted as a degree of belief, or credence, of the scientist. There will also be a probability and a degree of belief that a hypothesis will be true conditional on a piece of evidence (an observation, say) being true. Bayesianism proscribes that it is rational for the scientist to update their belief in the hypothesis to that conditional probability should it turn out that the evidence is, in fact, observed. Originating in the work of Neyman and Person, frequentism aims at providing the tools for reducing long-run error rates, such as the error-statistical approach developed by Mayo (1996) that focuses on how experimenters can avoid both type I and type II errors by building up a repertoire of procedures that detect errors if and only if they are present. Both Bayesianism and frequentism have developed over time, they are interpreted in different ways by its various proponents, and their relations to previous criticism to attempts at defining scientific method are seen differently by proponents and critics. The literature, surveys, reviews and criticism in this area are vast and the reader is referred to the entries on Bayesian epistemology and confirmation.

Attention to scientific practice, as we have seen, is not itself new. However, the turn to practice in the philosophy of science of late can be seen as a correction to the pessimism with respect to method in philosophy of science in later parts of the 20th century, and as an attempted reconciliation between sociological and rationalist explanations of scientific knowledge. Much of this work sees method as detailed and context specific problem-solving procedures, and methodological analyses to be at the same time descriptive, critical and advisory (see Nickles 1987 for an exposition of this view). The following section contains a survey of some of the practice focuses. In this section we turn fully to topics rather than chronology.

Examining the reasoning practices of historical and contemporary scientists, Nersessian (2008) has argued that new scientific concepts are constructed as solutions to specific problems by systematic reasoning, and that of analogy, visual representation and thought-experimentation are among the important reasoning practices employed. These ubiquitous forms of reasoning are reliable—but also fallible—methods of conceptual development and change. On her account, model-based reasoning consists of cycles of construction, simulation, evaluation and adaption of models that serve as interim interpretations of the target problem to be solved. Often, this process will lead to modifications or extensions, and a new cycle of simulation and evaluation. However, Nersessian also emphasizes that

creative model-based reasoning cannot be applied as a simple recipe, is not always productive of solutions, and even its most exemplary usages can lead to incorrect solutions. (Nersessian 2008: 11)

Thus, while on the one hand she agrees with many previous philosophers that there is no logic of discovery, discoveries can derive from reasoned processes, such that a large and integral part of scientific practice is

the creation of concepts through which to comprehend, structure, and communicate about physical phenomena .... (Nersessian 1987: 11)

Similarly, work on heuristics for discovery and theory construction by scholars such as Darden (1991) and Bechtel & Richardson (1993) present science as problem solving and investigate scientific problem solving as a special case of problem-solving in general. Drawing largely on cases from the biological sciences, much of their focus has been on reasoning strategies for the generation, evaluation, and revision of mechanistic explanations of complex systems.

Addressing another aspect of the context distinction, namely the traditional view that the primary role of experiments is to test theoretical hypotheses according to the H-D model, other philosophers of science have argued for additional roles that experiments can play. The notion of exploratory experimentation was introduced to describe experiments driven by the desire to obtain empirical regularities and to develop concepts and classifications in which these regularities can be described (Steinle 1997, 2002; Burian 1997; Waters 2007)). However the difference between theory driven experimentation and exploratory experimentation should not be seen as a sharp distinction. Theory driven experiments are not always directed at testing hypothesis, but may also be directed at various kinds of fact-gathering, such as determining numerical parameters. Vice versa, exploratory experiments are usually informed by theory in various ways and are therefore not theory-free. Instead, in exploratory experiments phenomena are investigated without first limiting the possible outcomes of the experiment on the basis of extant theory about the phenomena.

In recent years, the development of high throughput instrumentation in molecular biology and neighbouring fields has given rise to a special type of exploratory experimentation that collects and analyses very large amounts of data, and these new omics disciplines are often said to represent a break with the ideal of hypothesis-driven science (Burian 2007; Elliott 2007; Waters 2007; OMalley 2007) and instead described as data-driven research (Leonelli 2012; Strasser 2012) or as a special kind of convenience experimentation in which many experiments are done simply because they are extraordinarily convenient to perform (Krohs 2012).

The field of omics just described is possible because of the ability of computers to process, in a reasonable amount of time, the huge quantities of data required. Computers allow for more elaborate experimentation (higher speed, better filtering, more variables, sophisticated coordination and control), but also, through modelling and simulations, might constitute a form of experimentation themselves. Here, too, we can pose a version of the general question of method versus practice: does the practice of using computers fundamentally change scientific method, or merely provide a more efficient means of implementing standard methods?

Because computers can be used to automate measurements, quantifications, calculations, and statistical analyses where, for practical reasons, these operations cannot be otherwise carried out, many of the steps involved in reaching a conclusion on the basis of an experiment are now made inside a black box, without the direct involvement or awareness of a human. This has epistemological implications, regarding what we can know, and how we can know it. To have confidence in the results, computer methods are therefore subjected to tests of verification and validation.

The distinction between verification and validation is easiest to characterize in the case of computer simulations. In a typical computer simulation scenario computers are used to numerically integrate differential equations for which no analytic solution is available. The equations are part of the model the scientist uses to represent a phenomenon or system under investigation. Verifying a computer simulation means checking that the equations of the model are being correctly approximated. Validating a simulation means checking that the equations of the model are adequate for the inferences one wants to make on the basis of that model.

A number of issues related to computer simulations have been raised. The identification of validity and verification as the testing methods has been criticized. Oreskes et al. (1994) raise concerns that validiation, because it suggests deductive inference, might lead to over-confidence in the results of simulations. The distinction itself is probably too clean, since actual practice in the testing of simulations mixes and moves back and forth between the two (Weissart 1997; Parker 2008a; Winsberg 2010). Computer simulations do seem to have a non-inductive character, given that the principles by which they operate are built in by the programmers, and any results of the simulation follow from those in-built principles in such a way that those results could, in principle, be deduced from the program code and its inputs. The status of simulations as experiments has therefore been examined (Kaufmann and Smarr 1993; Humphreys 1995; Hughes 1999; Norton and Suppe 2001). This literature considers the epistemology of these experiments: what we can learn by simulation, and also the kinds of justifications which can be given in applying that knowledge to the real world. (Mayo 1996; Parker 2008b). As pointed out, part of the advantage of computer simulation derives from the fact that huge numbers of calculations can be carried out without requiring direct observation by the experimenter/​simulator. At the same time, many of these calculations are approximations to the calculations which would be performed first-hand in an ideal situation. Both factors introduce uncertainties into the inferences drawn from what is observed in the simulation.

Despite philosophical disagreements, the idea of the scientific method still figures prominently in contemporary discourse on many different topics, both within science and in society at large. Often, reference to scientific method is used in ways that convey either the legend of a single, universal method characteristic of all science, or grants to a particular method or set of methods privilege as a special gold standard, often with reference to particular philosophers to vindicate the claims. Discourse on scientific method also typically arises when there is a need to distinguish between science and other activities, or for justifying the special status conveyed to science. In these areas, the philosophical attempts at identifying a set of methods characteristic for scientific endeavors are closely related to the philosophy of sciences classical problem of demarcation (see the entry on science and pseudo-science) and to the philosophical analysis of the social dimension of scientific knowledge and the role of science in democratic society.

One of the settings in which the legend of a single, universal scientific method has been particularly strong is science education (see, e.g., Bauer 1992; McComas 1996; Wivagg & Allchin 2002). Often, the scientific method is presented in textbooks and educational web pages as a fixed four or five step procedure starting from observations and description of a phenomenon and progressing over formulation of a hypothesis which explains the phenomenon, designing and conducting experiments to test the hypothesis, analyzing the results, and ending with drawing a conclusion. Such references to a universal scientific method can be found in educational material at all levels of science education (Blachowicz 2009), and numerous studies have shown that the idea of a general and universal scientific method often form part of both students and teachers conception of science (see, e.g., Aikenhead 1987; Osborne et al. 2003).

Although occasionally phrased with reference to the H-D method, important historical roots of the legend in science education of a single, universal scientific method are the American philosopher and psychologist Deweys account of inquiry in How We Think (1910) and the British mathematician Karl Pearsons account of science in Grammar of Science (1892). On Deweys account, inquiry is divided into the five steps of

(i) a felt difficulty, (ii) its location and definition, (iii) suggestion of a possible solution, (iv) development by reasoning of the bearing of the suggestions, (v) further observation and experiment leading to its acceptance or rejection. (Dewey 1910: 72)

Similarly, on Pearsons account, scientific investigations start with measurement of data and observation of their correction and sequence from which scientific laws can be discovered with the aid of creative imagination. These laws have to be subject to criticism, and their final acceptance will have equal validity for all normally constituted minds. Both Deweys and Pearsons accounts should be seen as generalized abstractions of inquiry and not restricted to the realm of science—although both Dewey and Pearson referred to their respective accounts as the scientific method.

Occasionally, scientists make sweeping statements about a simple and distinct scientific method, as exemplified by Feynmans simplified version of a conjectures and refutations method presented, for example, in the last of his 1964 Cornell Messenger lectures. However, just as often scientists have come to the same conclusion as recent philosophy of science that there is not any unique, easily described scientific method. For example, the physicist and Nobel Laureate Weinberg described in the paper The Methods of Science ... And Those By Which We Live (1995) how

The fact that the standards of scientific success shift with time does not only make the philosophy of science difficult; it also raises problems for the public understanding of science. We do not have a fixed scientific method to rally around and defend. (1995: 8)

Reference to the scientific method has also often been used to argue for the scientific nature or special status of a particular activity. Philosophical positions that argue for a simple and unique scientific method as a criterion of demarcation, such as Popperian falsification, have often attracted practitioners who felt that they had a need to defend their domain of practice. For example, references to conjectures and refutation as the scientific method are abundant in much of the literature on complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)—alongside the competing position that CAM, as an alternative to conventional biomedicine, needs to develop its own methodology different from that of science.

Also within mainstream science, reference to the scientific method is used in arguments regarding the internal hierarchy of disciplines and domains. A frequently seen argument is that research based on the H-D method is superior to research based on induction from observations because in deductive inferences the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises. (See, e.g., Parascandola (1998) for an analysis of how this argument has been made to downgrade epidemiology compared to the laboratory sciences.) Similarly, based on an examination of the practices of major funding institutions such as the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Biomedical Sciences Research Practices (BBSRC) in the UK, OMalley et al. (2009) have argued that funding agencies seem to have a tendency to adhere to the view that the primary activity of science is to test hypotheses, while descriptive and exploratory research is seen as merely preparatory activities that are valuable only insofar as they fuel hypothesis-driven research.

In some areas of science, scholarly publications are structured in a way that may convey the impression of a neat and linear process of inquiry from stating a question, devising the methods by which to answer it, collecting the data, to drawing a conclusion from the analysis of data. For example, the codified format of publications in most biomedical journals known as the IMRAD format (Introduction, Method, Results, Analysis, Discussion) is explicitly described by the journal editors as not an arbitrary publication format but rather a direct reflection of the process of scientific discovery (see the so-called Vancouver Recommendations, ICMJE 2013: 11). However, scientific publications do not in general reflect the process by which the reported scientific results were produced. For example, under the provocative title Is the scientific paper a fraud?, Medawar argued that scientific papers generally misrepresent how the results have been produced (Medawar 1963/1996). Similar views have been advanced by philosophers, historians and sociologists of science (Gilbert 1976; Holmes 1987; Knorr-Cetina 1981; Schickore 2008; Suppe 1998) who have argued that scientists experimental practices are messy and often do not follow any recognizable pattern. Publications of research results, they argue, are retrospective reconstructions of these activities that often do not preserve the temporal order or the logic of these activities, but are instead often constructed in order to screen off potential criticism (see Schickore 2008 for a review of this work).

ordinarily, a key question to be answered in determining whether a theory or technique is scientific knowledge ... is whether it can be (and has been) tested. (Justice Blackmun, Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals; see Other Internet Resources for a link to the opinion)

But as argued by Haack (2005a,b, 2010) and by Foster & Hubner (1999), by equating the question of whether a piece of testimony is reliable with the question whether it is scientific as indicated by a special methodology, the court was producing an inconsistent mixture of Poppers and Hempels philosophies, and this has later led to considerable confusion in subsequent case rulings that drew on the Daubert case (see Haack 2010 for a detailed exposition).

The difficulties around identifying the methods of science are also reflected in the difficulties of identifying scientific misconduct in the form of improper application of the method or methods of science. One of the first and most influential attempts at defining misconduct in science was the US definition from 1989 that defined misconduct as

However, the other practices that seriously deviate clause was heavily criticized because it could be used to suppress creative or novel science. For example, the National Academy of Science stated in their report Responsible Science (1992) that it

wishes to discourage the possibility that a misconduct complaint could be lodged against scientists based solely on their use of novel or unorthodox research methods. (NAS: 27)

This clause was therefore later removed from the definition. For an entry into the key philosophical literature on conduct in science, see Shamoo & Resnick (2009).

The question of the source of the success of science has been at the core of philosophy since the beginning of modern science. If viewed as a matter of epistemology more generally, scientific method is a part of the entire history of philosophy. Over that time, science and whatever methods its practioners may employ have changed dramatically. Today, many philosophers have taken up the banners of pluralism or of practice to focus on what are, in effect, fine-grained and contextually limited examinations of scientific method. Others hope to shift perspectives in order to provide a renewed general account of what characterizes the activity we call science.

Another, similar approach has been offered by Haack (2003). She sets off, similar to Hoyningen-Huene, from a dissatisfaction with the recent clash between what she calls Old Deferentialism and New Cynicism. The Old Deferentialist position is that science progressed inductively by accumulating true theories confirmed by empirical evidence or deductively by testing conjectures against basic statements; while the New Cynics position is that science has no epistemic authority and no uniquely rational method and is merely just politics. Haack insists that contrary to the views of the New Cynics, there are objective epistemic standards, and there is something epistemologically special about science, even though the Old Deferentialists pictured this in a wrong way. Instead, she offers a new Critical Commonsensist account on which standards of good, strong, supportive evidence and well-conducted, honest, thorough and imaginative inquiry are not exclusive to the sciences, but the standards by which we judge all inquirers. In this sense, science does not differ in kind from other kinds of inquiry, but it may differ in the degree to which it requires broad and detailed background knowledge and a familiarity with a technical vocabulary that only specialists may possess.

Metaethics is the attempt to understand the metaphysical, epistemological, semantic, and psychological, presuppositions and commitments of moral thought, talk, and practice. As such, it counts within its domain a broad range of questions and puzzles, including: Is morality more a matter of taste than truth? Are moral standards culturally relative? Are there moral facts? If there are moral facts, what is their origin? How is it that they set an appropriate standard for our behavior? How might moral facts be related to other facts (about psychology, happiness, human conventions…)? And how do we learn about the moral facts, if there are any? These questions lead naturally to puzzles about the meaning of moral claims as well as about moral truth and the justification of our moral commitments. Metaethics explores as well the connection between values, reasons for action, and human motivation, asking how it is that moral standards might provide us with reasons to do or refrain from doing as it demands, and it addresses many of the issues commonly bound up with the nature of freedom and its significance (or not) for moral responsibility

The range of issues, puzzles and questions that fall within metaethics' purview are consistently abstract. They reflect the fact that metaethics involves an attempt to step back from particular substantive debates within morality to ask about the views, assumptions, and commitments that are shared by those who engage in the debate. By and large, the metaethical issues that emerge as a result of this process of stepping back can be addressed without taking a particular stand on substantive moral issues that started the process. In fact, metaethics has seemed to many to offer a crucial neutral background against which competing moral views need to be seen if they are to be assessed properly. Some metaethicists early in the twentieth century went so far as to hold that their own work made no substantive moral assumptions at all and had no practical implications.[2] Whether any view that is recognizably still a view about the nature and status of ethics could manage this is dubious. But there is no doubt that, whatever metaethics's substantive assumptions and practical implications might be, it involves reflecting on the presuppositions and commitments of those engaging in moral thought, talk, and practice and so abstracting away from particular moral judgments.

Such reflection quickly reveals the extent to which various aspects of morality might reasonably be seen as both intellectually and practically problematic. On the intellectual side, many have worried that there is no good way to vindicate the assumptions and commitments of morality. A careful and clear-eyed study of morality will reveal, some argue, that morality is a myth; others argue that the various principles that are presented as authoritative standards for all are actually merely expressions of emotion or projections of the idiosyncratic attitudes of those advocating the principles; still others argue that in some other way morality is not what it pretends to be and not what it needs to be if it is to be legitimate. On the practical side, many have pressed the difficulty of getting people to judge themselves and others impartially; others have worried that, while we have an interest in convincing others to conform to morality, we ourselves rarely have any reason, really, to conform; still others have thought that the sort of freedom morality assumes is not available to humans as they actually are.

Of course these worries and arguments regularly find counterparts on the other side, with people maintaining that, properly understood, morality is no myth, that its pretensions can be vindicated, that we have all the reason we need to embrace morality and meet its demands, and that people, at least some people under some circumstances, have whatever sort of freedom it is that morality might require.

None of the arguments, on either side, can go quickly or easily. They all depend, first, on identifying and defending the presuppositions and commitments one takes to be at issue and then, second, on showing that they either cannot, or can, be defended. What is at stake is, at least, an understanding of what is an important part of most peoples' lives, but there is potentially a lot more at stake to the extent the presuppositions and commitments people take for granted turn out to be suspect. For then, not only will our understanding of that part of our lives be compromised, our sense that it is important may well disappear as well.

Despite the abstract and deeply controversial nature of metaethics, its central concerns arise naturally — perhaps even inevitably — as one reflects critically on one's own moral convictions. So it is no surprise that, in Plato's Republic, Polemarchus' claim that being a just person enhances one's life developed quickly into a decidedly metaethical discussion of the origin and nature of justice. Early in Book I, for instance, Thrasymachus defends the idea that justice is whatever is in the interest of the stronger, arguing that morality is a human creation designed by the rich and powerful to control and exploit others. A myth for the weak-minded, arranged for the advantage of a few, justice imposes burdens most have reason to set aside. So Thrasymachus argues. Glaucon follows up, in Book II, with an alternative, and less cynical, proposal. While he too sees morality as a human creation, he sees it as a salutary solution to the serious problems we would otherwise face. He argues that people naturally find themselves unable successfully to ensure that their own wills will rule while, simultaneously, being subject regularly to the will of others. The principles of justice are, he thinks, reasonably introduced and enforced by all as a good way to ensure peace and stability in society. Socrates, in contrast, rejects the idea that justice is a human invention and argues instead that justice provides independent and eternal standards against which human practices, conventions, and institutions can be judged. These different views will likely have implications for what value justice might have. At the same time, though, accepting one or the other view of the nature of justice is compatible with a range of substantive views about what, specifically, justice consists in and about its value.

According to many, Socrates's position fits well with morality's pretensions. It fits well also with the thought that whatever standards humans might put in place are, one and all, liable to moral criticism. Of course, Socrates's position brings along a suite of puzzles concerning the nature of these transcendent standards. What is their origin and from where do they derive their authority?

Many have thought the right answers to these questions are found in an appeal to God. On their view, moral principles are the expression of God's will — they are His commands to us — and they get their authority from their source. In important ways, though, this merely shifts the puzzles back a step. Whatever problems one might have making sense of eternal transcendent standards re-emerge when trying to make sense of an eternal transcendent being who might issue commands. And, as Plato emphasized in Euthyphro, one is also left with the difficulty of explaining why God's commands are authoritative.

One plausible answer might be that God's perfect knowledge of right and wrong, or God's own moral perfection, explains why his commands serve legitimately as standards for us. But that answer assumes that standards of morality exist independently of God's will (either as objects of his knowledge or as standards in light of which He counts as morally perfect), in which case speaking of morality as consisting of God's commands will not explain the origin or nature of these independently existing standards.

Alternatively, one might eschew an appeal to God's knowledge or goodness and claim that there is no independent standard for God's will and nature. But that leaves in place the puzzle concerning the authority of moral principles. If we reject the idea that God's commands reflect His knowledge of right and wrong, and reject as well the idea that God is all good, it seems reasonable to wonder why his commands have any special authority.[3]

One might here point to God's power to punish or to His role in our creation. But neither consideration seems to establish legitimate authority on its own. In general, at least, the mere fact that one has the power to enforce one's commands does not establish those commands as legitimate, nor does it ensure that one has a right to punish those who fail to conform to one's commands. Similarly, in general, the mere fact that one created something does not establish that one properly has absolute control over what one has created. Of course, room remains to argue that there is something special about God's power, or about His role as creator, that makes his commands distinctively legitimate. What is needed is an account of what is special. And, in this context, it needs to be an account that explains how God's commands, as opposed to the commands that others might issue, have an authority. Moreover, if appealing to God is to solve the metaethical puzzle posed by Euthyphro, the account offered must not itself rely on, or presuppose, the sort of transcendent standards we have been attempting to explain.

One appealing feature of Glaucon's account of morality as a mutually advantageous convention is that it renders morality's origin and nature non-mysterious. Moral facts, on this sort of view, emerge as no more puzzling than facts about what is legal or polite. In each case, the standing of some behavior (as moral, or legal, or polite) depends on its conforming to, or conflicting with, various standards that have been put in place. Glaucon's account also makes clear why it is that people might care deeply about morality's demands (even as they are, in their own cases, tempted to violate them when they believe they can with impunity), since the relevant conventions are mutually advantageous.

Yet conventionalist views such as Glaucon's have real difficulties fitting with the common idea that the fundamental principles of morality are universal. Conventions, after all, are contingent creations that differ from place to place and come in to, and go out of, existence. Moreover, conventions seem liable to arbitrariness in ways that threaten to undermine their claim to authority unless they are recognized (at least implicitly) as satisfying some convention-independent standard. That some convention demands something seems to provide reason to conform to the demand only when the convention is, itself, just or reasonable, or in some other way good. And this suggests that, to whatever extent specific moral rules and principles are products of convention, their claim to authority relies on some standards that are not products of convention.

Needless to say, these considerations are not decisive, and those who see morality as a kind of convention have a variety of plausible ways to address the worries mentioned above. As a result, the view remains attractive. Still, many — even many who think an appeal to convention is essential to making sense of morality — think that the proper account of morality cannot be a matter of conventions all the way down.[4] But that does not mean that they think that the standards that serve to justify the demands of (some) conventions are mysterious. Some, for instance, argue that what makes a convention good, and so serves to justify its demands, is its contribution to overall happiness, while others see the measure of conventions in their ability to advance the interests of each considered singly, and still others maintain that the value of conventions is found in their capacity to secure the approval of those who consider them impartially. On all such accounts, value is convention-independent, but it is nonetheless metaphysically non-mysterious. Each of these accounts portrays value as, at bottom, a familiar, completely natural, feature of the world. Moreover, while (on these accounts) particular claims concerning value will prove hard to establish and controversial, there is no special puzzle about what we would be trying to discover or what would count as relevant evidence.

All of these views, conventionalist and not, identify various moral properties with non-problematic natural features of the world. As a result, they are commonly characterized as versions of naturalism and are contrasted with non-naturalist views that see morality as presupposing, or being committed to, properties over and above those that would be countenanced by natural science. Non-naturalism comes with two distinctive burdens: (i) accounting for how the realm of moral properties fits in with familiar natural properties and (ii) explaining how it is that we are able to learn anything about these moral properties. Naturalism, in contrast, avoids these metaphysical and epistemological burdens.

Despite its advantages, naturalism has difficulty capturing well what people take to be the true nature of morality. In saying something is good or right or virtuous we seem to be saying something more than, or at least different from, what we would be saying in describing it as having certain natural features. Correspondingly, no amount of empirical investigation seems by itself, without some moral assumption(s) in play, sufficient to settle a moral question.

David Hume seemed to have these points in mind when he observed that an ought' cannot be derived from an is. [5] There is substantial debate about just what Hume meant, and similarly substantial debate as well about whether he was right. But at least part of Hume's concern seems to have been that no set of claims about plain matters of fact ('is' claims) entail any evaluative claims ('ought' claims). That is, he seems to have thought, that one can infer the latter from the former only if, in addition to premises concerning plain matters of fact, one has on hand as well at least one evaluative premise. If, for instance, one infers from the fact that someone is feeling pain that something bad is happening, one is at least presupposing that pain is bad. And that presupposition, in turn, is not entailed by any claims concerned solely with plain matters of fact. If Hume is right, every valid argument for an evaluative conclusion either includes or presupposes some evaluative premise. And, as a result, there is no value neutral argument for an evaluative conclusion.

Coming at the same issues from a different direction, G. E. Moore argued (at the beginning of the twentieth century) that no naturalist account of morality could do justice to what we are actually thinking and claiming when we make moral judgments.[6] Moore had in mind a variety of naturalist views that, at the time, had come to be seen as, on balance, the most attractive accounts of the nature of morality. While these views differed among themselves as to what goodness, rightness, virtue and justice might consist in, they shared a commitment to seeing morality as a wholly natural phenomenon and they all saw moral judgment as a matter of thinking that actions, institutions, or characters had some particular natural property or other. According to these views, moral properties were to be identified with some natural property or other (e.g. with what is pleasant, or what satisfies someone's desire, or what conforms to social rules that are in force).

Considering specifically views that identified goodness either with pleasure or with being the object of a desire one desires to have, Moore maintained that such views confused the property goodness with some other property that good things might happen to have. In support of his claim, Moore offered a simple test. Take whichever account you will — say, one according to which to be good is to be pleasant — and then consider whether a person who understands the terms involved might nonetheless intelligibly ask whether something she acknowledges to be pleasant is good. It seems she could. And it seems too that in asking the question she would not then be revealing any kind of conceptual confusion or incompetence. The question is, as Moore put it, a genuinely open one. But then we must grant that to think something is pleasant is not identical to thinking it good. Otherwise, wondering whether something that is, admittedly, pleasant, is good would be as senseless as wondering whether a given pleasant thing was pleasant. If, though, to think something good is different than thinking it pleasant, such thoughts (Moore assumed) must involve attributing distinct properties.

Moore was quick to point out that granting that the question is open, in the sense his argument supposes, is compatible with discovering that, as a matter of fact, everything that is pleasant is also good. Moore's point is that the question is not settled — not closed — on conceptual grounds (whereas it would be if thinking something good were just a matter of thinking it pleasant). Because analogous questions remain open for all the candidate naturalist proposals, Moore argued that no such proposal could legitimately be defended as a conceptual truth and that they all failed to capture accurately what we are thinking in thinking of something that it is good.

Moore's argument had a tremendous impact, striking most people at the time as decisive. As a result, non-naturalism got a new lease on life with a number of people working in metaethics trying to articulate, systematize, and defend accounts of morality that resisted the temptation to identify moral properties with natural properties.[7] Much of the attention was given, by those who have come to be called intuitionists, to defending the idea that moral knowledge, while not based on our senses and on the empirical data we might collect, was nonetheless on as secure a footing as, say, our knowledge of mathematics or of the fundamental concepts (of, say, causation and necessity) that play crucial roles in science. Much of the work in metaethics pursued a strategy of finding companions in guilt, of showing that the status of moral properties as non-natural and the attendant implications for what we must suppose about the nature of moral evidence, if we are to take ourselves as having any, did not leave morality any worse off than other respected fields of knowledge.

Yet Moore's casual slide from claims about what we are thinking to the nature of the properties we are attributing in thinking as we do, offered an important point of resistance. As Moore saw things, to make a moral claim is to express a distinctive belief (that might be true or false) about how things are. Specifically, it is to express the belief that some course of action, or institution, or character trait had the property of being right, or good, or virtuous. The challenge (Moore assumed) is to figure out what property it is that we are taking a thing to have, in thinking of it as right, or good, or virtuous. And the place to look, he thought, is at the content of our beliefs.

According to many, while Moore's Open Question argument does show that moral thinking is distinctive and should not be treated as part and parcel of thinking about non-moral matters, Moore was wrong in holding that the important difference should be traced to the nature of the properties we are taking things to have. According to some of these critics, Moore's mistake is in thinking we are attributing properties at all, when we think of something as right, or good, or virtuous; according to others, his mistake was in thinking that how we think of a property reveals the true nature of the property.[8]

The first line of criticism emerged soon after Moore first offered his Open Question Argument, with philosophers suggesting that in thinking morally we may well not be attributing properties at all.[9] Agreeing that it was a mistake to see moral claims as attributing natural properties to things, non-cognitivists argue that Moore's mistake was in thinking that moral claims attribute any sort of property to things, and so he was also wrong in thinking that moral claims have propositional content and express genuine beliefs. The Open Question is always open, they argue, not because we are, in making a moral judgment, attributing some non-natural property to things, but because we are not attributing any property at all. We are not saying anything that might be true or false, nor are we expressing a belief. We are doing something altogether different: taking a stand, or expressing an emotion, or prescribing something. On these views, moral judgments express some attitude other than belief and lack the sort of cognitive content that would allow them to be true or false.

From the start non-cognitivists have had an eye on both (i) the non-cognitive attitudes that are expressed in making a moral claim and (ii) what people are doing in making such claims. When focusing on the first, they emphasize that moral terms get their meaning not by their link to beliefs that represent the world as being a certain way, but by their connection to non-cognitive attitudes — e.g., reactions to the way the world is, or desires for how the world might be. Here their attention, in giving an account of the meaning of moral terms is on those terms' conventionally-established connection to certain attitudes. (Of course people can use such a term without actually having the corresponding attitudes, but understanding the term is a matter of seeing that it is a linguistically appropriate way to express the attitude.) When focusing on the second, non-cognitivists emphasize moral language's role as tool for influencing the others. Here their attention is on in claiming that something is, say, wrong, people are consistently not just expressing their opposition to it but telling others not to do it, or working to persuade them not to, or in some other way working to direct action. The two ideas go together naturally, since if the first is right, then it would help explain why people can and do use moral language in the way the second suggests. But the ideas are separable. And many think that the expressivist idea advanced by the first goes to the heart of the matter, while thinking that concentrating on the directive or prescriptive use of moral language can at best be secondary.

Whatever the details, the non-cognitivists share the idea that one can admit that something is pleasant, or the object of a desire, or such that it conforms to some rule in force, and nonetheless not take a stand regarding it, or not have any particular emotion concerning it, or not have any interest in prescribing anything relating to it. The Open Question is open, they hold, precisely because the attitudes expressed by a moral judgment all involve something other than merely believing of something that it has certain features (whether natural or not). At the same time, the non-cognitivists' proposals fit well with granting Hume's claim concerning the gap between is' and ought': whatever facts one grants, whatever is' claims one endorses, there is no logical inconsistency involved in failing to take a relevant stand, or to express a emotion towards it, or to prescribe something related to it. Between the beliefs we might have and the other attitudes we might form, no entailment relations hold at all.

Non-cognitivists, of course, need to explain why it seems so plausible to see moral judgment as an expression of belief and as a matter of attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters. And they need to explain why moral thought seems appropriately subject to the rules of logic, whereas the various attitudes that play central roles in the non-cognitivist accounts all seem to fall outside of that realm. Taking the challenge head-on, recent versions of expressivism, flying the banner of quasi-realism, have taken as a central project explaining, on non-cognitivist foundations, how and why moral language has all the trappings of being cognitivist and realist. These views start with a picture of the world as having neither moral properties nor people believing in moral properties (though they have other beliefs), and then explain how a practice of thinking and talking about moral properties, moral beliefs, moral truth, and moral facts, might naturally and properly emerge. The central idea is that we can see our thought and talk as fundamentally a matter of our expressing our affective attitudes or commitments which gives rise to legitimate thought and talk about corresponding properties, beliefs, truths and facts. Two moves underwrite this idea. One is to hold that talk of properties, beliefs, truths and facts comes cheap: Once one holds sincerely that Lying is wrong, no additional commitments come with adding Lying has the property of being wrong or I believe that lying is wrong or It is true that lying is wrong or that It is a fact that lying is wrong. These are all, in effect, just different ways of saying the same thing. And if, in the first place, sincerely saying Lying is wrong is a matter of expressing an attitude or a commitment then so too are these alternative ways of saying the same thing. The second move that underwrites quasi-realism is that the question of whether the cognitivist and realist sounding discourse is legitimate is, itself, an evaluative question judged in light of one's attitudes and commitments. There is, on this view, no independent standard of, say, matching the world that one can deploy without, in choosing that standard, expressing one's attitudes and commitments.[10]

Various versions of non-cognitivism, and in particular versions of quasi-realist expressivism, remain among the most attractive ways of resisting the non-naturalist implications of Moore's Open Question Argument.[11] But they are not the only option. Many argue that, while Moore's argument shows that thinking something is good is different than thinking it is pleasant (or the object of a desire, or such as to conform to some norm that is in force), it does not show that being good is different from being pleasant (or the object of a desire, or such as to conform to some norm that is in force). After all, they point out, thinking that some liquid is H2O is different from thinking it is water and one might intelligibly wonder whether what one grants to be water really is H2O. Yet that does not show that being water is anything other than being H20. Far from it. A difference between the thoughts does not establish a difference in the properties. Thus, for all the Open Question Argument shows, it might turn out that a naturalist account of the nature of moral properties is correct. The naturalist account cannot be defended simply as a conceptual truth but it also cannot be rejected, as Moore thought it could be, as obviously confusing one property (the natural property) for another one (the moral property). This sort of cognitivism has no trouble explaining why it seems so plausible to see moral judgment as an expression of belief and as a matter of attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters. Moral judgments are in fact, on this sort of account, the expression of belief and they do involve attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters (though the account holds that the true nature of the property being attributed is something that might come as a surprise to some). Similarly, this sort of cognitivism can explain why moral thought seems appropriately subject to the rules of logic: it seems appropriately subject to these rules because it is. Problems emerge, however, when it comes to explaining the apparently distinctive nature of moral thinking. If thinking that something is good or right is a matter of attributing to the thing some natural property or other, then what explains the apparently distinctive nature of moral thought?

Cognitivists and non-cognitivists face a common challenge: to account for the nature of moral thought and talk that simultaneously does justice to its distinctive nature without failing to appreciate the significant ways in which it is continuous with non-moral thought and talk. Cognitivism has a relatively easy time accommodating the continuity between moral and non-moral thought and talk, but, especially when combined with naturalism, it faces a real challenge in marking the distinctive nature of moral thought and talk; non-cognitivism has no trouble making room for the distinctive nature of moral thought and talk, but it has trouble accommodating the continuity.

What has always been attractive about Moorean non-naturalism is its capacity to combine the continuity and the difference into a coherent picture. There is room, at least, to account for moral thought's continuity with other thought by emphasizing that it is all a matter of attributing properties (albeit different properties) to things; and there is room too for locating the distinctive nature of moral thought in the putatively authoritative standing of the properties attributed. Of course leaving room for an account is not the same as actually providing one, and Moore himself does not actually offer much at all by way of an explanation of the normative authority (as we might call it) of moral properties. In any case, what has always been troubling about Moore's view is that the coherent picture that emerges seems to presuppose (i) the existence of metaphysically dubious properties that fall outside the causal nexus and, so, are such that (ii) it would be a complete mystery how we could every reliably learn anything about them, if they were to exist. Moore, and the intuitionists who followed him, work in various ways to address these concerns. Error theorists, in contrast, hold that the coherent picture painted by Moore is, at least roughly, the right account of what moral thought and talk involves, but they go on to argue that the metaphysically and epistemically troubling implications of that picture properly undermine its credibility. They argue that we have compelling reasons to reject the presuppositions of moral thought.[12]

The error theorists' position regarding morality is the counterpart, with respect to moral thought, of the atheist's position with respect to views concerning God's will and ways. In both cases, the suggestion is that the thoughts at issue involve a mistake or a failed presupposition, and that, because of this, they cannot be true. The error theorist's position, it is worth noting, requires establishing two claims that have each met a lot of resistance: that moral thought really has the presuppositions the error theorist supposes and that those presuppositions are as untenable as the error theorist maintains. At the same time, though, anyone who hopes to vindicate moral thought has the burden of showing that its actual presuppositions and implications are, after all, defensible.

Anyone mounting such a defense needs to offer some account of how it is we might successfully justify one set of moral judgments as over against others. When we turn to morality, what counts as good grounds for holding one view rather than other? What sort of evidence might be available? If Hume and Moore are right, no evidence that appeals solely to non-evaluative considerations will be sufficient (unless we presuppose some principle of inference that connects non-moral premises to moral conclusions). But if we need to rely on evaluative premises or principles in order to infer substantive moral conclusions from non-moral premises (e.g. non-moral premises regarding the impact of a course of action on pleasure or on the satisfaction of human interests), the question immediately arises, How might we justify these evaluative premises or principles?

One answer often offered is that, at a suitably abstract level, there are premises or principles that everyone in fact accepts. Perhaps Murder is wrong, or pain is bad, or everyone should be treated equally, would qualify. But of course such claims hardly do much work since questions immediately arise about which killings constitute murder and about how different pains should be compared and about which way of treating people counts as treating them equally in the relevant way. No moral claim that is plausibly offered as actually accepted by all, or nearly all, people can possibly be substantive enough to help settle on one view rather than another as better justified.

One might, in light of this, offer a more substantive principle, not as one that people actually all accept, but as one that they are all, in fact, committed to (though they may not realize it). This strategy offers the prospect of identifying a principle rich enough in content to serve as the justifying ground for other moral judgments. Yet it requires showing how the principle(s) identified work to justify the more specific judgments they are meant to support. Moreover, one who takes this approach needs also to justify the claim that people are actually committed to the principle in the first place. And this raises the suspicion that claiming there are certain principles to which everyone is committed simply relocates the original challenge, without actually meeting it.

In any case, even if there are suitably substantive principles to which people are committed, and this can be shown, and even if there is a way to establish as well that the principles in question would (if right) actually justify more specific moral judgments, one might understandably worry about the status of the resulting structure. Why not think of it as a castle in the sky, a structure with no appropriate foundation? After all, the fact that we happen to accept, or are committed to accepting, some principle, seems a long way from showing that the principle is true or right.

Our moral judgments (about particular cases as well as about general principles) seem to float disconcertingly free from our normal sources of evidence concerning the nature of the world. We cannot see, touch, taste, or smell value or rightness or virtue, even as we can see, touch, taste, or smell some of the things that have value or that are right or that manifest virtue. So how do we learn about value and rightness and virtue themselves? What grounds do we have for thinking our various moral judgments link up appropriately with what they are judgments of?

Of course moral judgments are not the only judgments that face such a challenge. Many mathematical, modal, and religious judgments face a similar challenge. They all apparently concern matters that are not directly available to the senses and that are, in various ways, mysterious. That establishes some companions in guilt, but also provides the hope that reasonable accounts of how we might learn (or not) about numbers, possibility and necessity, and God, might provide insight into the evidence (if any) we are able to secure concerning morality.

It is worth emphasizing that positive theories of moral epistemology are inevitably bound up with accounts of the nature of moral judgment and their metaphysical presuppositions and commitments. On some accounts, there is nothing to know and so no need for an epistemological theory at all. On others, a proper understanding of moral judgments will reveal that justifying them is of a piece with justifying other judgments for which we have, or hope to have, a plausible epistemology, so the epistemology of morality will be continuous with epistemological theories of other domains. On still other accounts, moral judgments are such that only a sui generis epistemology would make sense of our capacity to acquire moral knowledge. No matter which of these options one takes, epistemological skepticism looms as a real possibility. And in the first case, where there is by implication nothing to know, it does not merely loom, it arrives inevitably. Even if one succeeds in developing a positive theory of moral epistemology in light of which moral knowledge might be possible, the substantive challenge of showing that knowledge has actually been secured remains formidable.

At the same time, much of morality seems clearly a matter of knowing how — how to respond to the need of others, how to respond to threats, how to carry oneself in various situations — and not primarily (if at all) a matter of knowing that something is the case. No doubt, focusing on knowing how, rather than knowing that, does not address skepticism concerning the claims we might make as to which know how is morally significant. But paying attention to the degree to which people count as moral (or immoral) not because of what they say or believe, but because of how they act, is important to appreciating both the nature of morality and what all a plausible account of moral knowledge must encompass.

Among morality's distinctive features, all agree, is its apparently intimate connection to action. In making moral judgments, for instance, we seem to be making a claim that, if true, establishes that someone or other has a reason to act or be a certain way. This marks an important difference between moral claims and claims concerning, say, color. The claim that something is red is, even if true, only contingently connected to whether anyone has any reason at all to act or be a certain way. Whereas if a certain thing is morally good it seems that everyone necessarily has at least some reason (perhaps overrideable or defeasible, but still some reason) to promote, pursue, protect, or respect it — at least if they recognize that it is good. Moreover, many have thought, to judge sincerely that something is good (whether or not one is right) is to have some motivation (again, perhaps overrideable or defeasible, but still some motivation) to promote, pursue, protect, or respect it.

Thus there seem to be necessary connections between moral properties and reasons and also between moral judgments and motivations. Some have thought as well that there is a necessary connection between moral judgments and reasons, such that if one judges that something is good or right then (whether one is right or not) one had a reason to act or be a certain way. Others have thought that there is a connection, again, a necessary connection, between there being a reason for someone to act or be a certain way and that person being, or at least being able to be, motivated in a certain way.[13] This last suggestion, that (say) one can have reason to do only what one might be motivated to do, has implications as well for what might count as good, if something is good only if one has a reason to act in a certain way with respect to it.[14]

Each of these supposed necessary connections is controversial and yet each has plausibly been taken to be at the heart of what is distinctive about morality. At the same time, different proposed connections fit more or less well with different accounts of morality and at least some of the supposed connections are flat out incompatible with some of the accounts. Thus those versions of non-cognitivism that see making a moral judgment as a matter of expressing some motivating attitude have an easier time explaining the internal connection (if there is one) between sincerely making a moral judgment and having an appropriate motive, while certain naturalist cognitivist proposals, for instance those that identify goodness with having the capacity to garner approval from someone who is fully informed, must hold that a person might sincerely judge that something would secure that approval and yet be utterly unmotivated by that fact.[15]

Working through the ways in which a proper appreciation of the relations between morality, reasons, and motivation constrain and inform an account of morality has been a central issue in metaethics. In fact, Glaucon's original proposal concerning the nature of morality (according to which morality is a conventional solution to problems we would otherwise have to face) was introduced as a way of pressing a worry about morality: Morality pretends to provide reason to all, virtue is supposed to be its own reward, and a person is told she should do the right thing because it is right and not because she hopes for some reward, yet, in the face of the demands morality sometimes makes, these claims concerning its nature and value all seem dubious. Specifically, if morality is (as Glaucon's proposal would have it) constituted solely by a set of conventional rules we put in place to secure the benefits we receive from the restraint of others, it looks as if the only reason (and the only motive) we would each have for conforming to the rules would be found in the consequences we hope such compliance would secure. In cases where we could get the benefits without the restraint (as when our failure to restrain ourselves would be undetected) we would have neither reason nor motive not to violate the rules. Thus, if Glaucon is right about the nature of morality, then morality (properly understood) would only provide reason to some, under some circumstances, not reason to all, always. Moreover, virtue would not be its own reward. And morality would not be such that it would make sense for a person to do the right thing (as defined by the rules in place) for its own sake, since the sole value of the relevant rules is found in the benefits that come from others complying with those rules.

Glaucon's ultimate aim was to get from Socrates an account of morality that — unlike his own — would serve to vindicate morality's pretensions. He assumed that if no such account was forthcoming morality's claim on our allegiance would have been undermined even as we might continue to have our own reasons for perpetuating the myth and for working to see that others comply with its rules. Much of the Republic is then given over to Socrates' attempt to develop first an account of the nature of morality (specifically, of justice) and then, second, to arguing that being moral is valuable regardless of the consequences. Socrates' concern, in showing that being moral is valuable, is to show specifically that it is valuable to the person who is moral, that the virtuous person, and not just others, benefits from her virtue. Indeed, he tries to show that being moral is so valuable to the person who is moral, that whatever the consequences of injustice might be, however great the rewards, they could never be valuable enough to outweigh the loss of one's virtue.

Socrates' own account of the metaphysical and epistemological underpinnings of his view (his appeal to eternal, non-physical Platonic Forms and to our intellectual access to those Forms) commits him unmistakably to non-naturalism and to something like intuitionism. Yet his account of the nature of justice and the specific features of justice that he takes to establish its value, all appeal to considerations that are as available to a naturalist as to a non-naturalist.

In any case, the question underlying Glaucon's concern — Why should I be moral? — has consistently been at the center of attempts to explain the connection between morality and what we have reason to do.[16] Some have argued that the question is misplaced, at least if it assumes there must be some non-moral reason to be moral. Others have held that the question is easily answered on the grounds that the fact that some action is morally required, for instance, entails that one has reason to do it. And still others have maintained that the question presses the single most important challenge to morality's legitimacy, since morality's claim on our allegiance depends on our having reason to comply with its demands, yet explaining why we might have those reasons is extraordinarily difficult.

Whatever view one ends up adopting concerning the connections that hold (or do not hold) among moral properties, moral judgments, reasons for action, and effective motivations, no account is plausible as a vindication of morality unless it makes sense of how and why moral considerations might properly figure in practical deliberation that results in decision and action. Doing this successfully is, in principle, compatible with thinking moral properties do not always provide reasons, compatible too with holding that moral judgments some times fail to motivate, and, finally, compatible as well with the idea that one might have a reason to perform some action that one has no motivation to perform. Of course, these various views are each themselves quite controversial and involve rejecting what others have thought to be necessary truths.

Making sense of how moral considerations might figure in practical deliberation is especially important when it comes to explaining when and why people are responsible for what they do or fail to do. Some of that explanatory job is a matter of moral theory, not metaethics, and involves figuring out what counts as good excuses, legitimate justifications, and appropriate burdens. A theory of moral responsibility inevitably relies on substantive moral theory.

Yet there are important metaethical issues bound up in giving an account of moral responsibility. They emerge most sharply as one considers the nature and significance of free will. Does responsibility presuppose free will? If so, when does someone count as having a free will? It cannot merely be a matter of her will being uncaused. After all, a person whose will was utterly random, responsive neither to her nor to the reasons she had for doing things, would be a person no freer (in the relevant sense) than a person whose will was fully and directly controlled by someone else as a puppeteer might control a puppet. What would it take for her will to count as appropriately responsive, either to her or to her reasons? Is this appropriate responsiveness a matter of being undetermined or of being determined by the right things or in the right way? In any case, if one has the sort of free will that moral responsibility requires (whatever that turns out to be) how are we to understand the connection between the will, and what influences it, on the one hand, and the various psychological and physical causes that apparently determine the behavior that is identified as the action one performs willingly, on the other? How do agents with a free will fit within a natural world?

Not surprisingly, the range of answers that have been offered to these questions covers an exceedingly broad spectrum. Some hold that moral responsibility requires a certain kind of freedom and then argue that we lack that sort of freedom or, alternatively, that we at least sometimes have it. Others, though, maintain that freedom is irrelevant and that holding people morally responsible makes sense only if we see their wills as determined. And others identify a truly free will not with a will that is undetermined, but with one that is determined by reason. And still others argue that the right understanding of moral responsibility will show that metaphysical questions concerning the nature of the will are irrelevant.

The history of moral theory is a history of attempts to identify, articulate, and defend general moral principles that serve to explain when and why various types of action, institutions, or characters count as right or wrong, just or unjust, virtuous or vicious. The assumption has consistently been that there is a general and principled account of morality to be given. And this assumption has survived the fact that few people think any particular set of principles that we have actually succeeded in articulating, is fully adequate. What explains the assumption? Why not hold, as particularists do, that there may well be no set of general principles that adequately mark moral distinctions? Or, why not think, as skeptics do, that our repeated failures actually to identify fully adequate principles shows that morality is a chimera?

Wrestling with these questions returns one immediately and directly to wondering about the nature of morality and the role it is supposed to play in human life. What is it about morality's nature, or its role, that would make sense of the idea that general principles are essential to it? Why not suppose that one case of cruelty might be wrong, and another not wrong, without there being any ground that would justify treating them as different? Why is it so natural to suppose that there must be some other difference — say a difference in their consequences, or a difference in what has led up to the act of cruelty — that underwrites and justifies the thought that one is wrong, but not the other? Why not grant that one of the two just happened to be wrong and the other happened not to be? Could not moral properties just happen to have been distributed randomly so that, in the end, there is no justification for one action having a certain moral standing while another, otherwise the same, has a different standing? These suggested possibilities are, I believe, not real possibilities at all. They would each entail that moral demands are fundamentally arbitrary in a way that is incompatible with morality's claim to authority. But what is it about morality that precludes it being fundamentally arbitrary? A good answer, I suspect, will lead one away from the idea that moral properties are merely there in the world to be found, wholly independent of our concerns and practices. But a good answer is needed. And a good answer is not provided simply by supplying, if one could, a consistent and coherent set of principles that successfully systematized particular moral judgments about acts, institutions, and characters. The challenge here is not simply to show that moral judgments can be seen to fit a pattern; the challenge is to show that the pattern they fit — the principle(s) to which they conform — work to explain and justify their importance.

I was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on thebank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into thebook her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations init, and what is the use of a book, thought I without pictures orconversations?

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for thehot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasureof making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up andpicking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ranclose by her.

There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did I think it soVERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, Oh dear!Oh dear! I shall be late! (when she thought it over afterwards, itoccurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the timeit all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCHOUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on,I started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she hadnever before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watchto take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the fieldafter it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a largerabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went I after it, never once considering howin the world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and thendipped suddenly down, so suddenly that I had not a moment to thinkabout stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deepwell.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she hadplenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what wasgoing to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out whatshe was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then shelooked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled withcupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictureshung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves asshe passed; it was labelled ORANGE MARMALADE, but to her greatdisappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fearof killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards asshe fell past it.

Well! thought I to herself, after such a fall as this, I shallthink nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they'll all think me athome! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even if I fell off the topof the house! (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall NEVER come to an end! I wonder howmany miles I've fallen by this time? she said aloud. I must be gettingsomewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be fourthousand miles down, I think- (for, you see, I had learnt severalthings of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though thiswas not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as therewas no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over)'-yes, that's about the right distance-but then I wonder what Latitudeor Longitude I've got to? (I had no idea what Latitude was, orLongitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. I wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH theearth! How funny it'll seem to come out among the people that walk withtheir heads downward! The Antipathies, I think- (she was rather gladthere WAS no one listening, this time, as it didn't sound at all theright word) -but I shall have to ask them what the name of the countryis, you know. Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia? (andshe tried to curtsey as she spoke-fancy CURTSEYING as you're fallingthrough the air! Do you think you could manage it?) And what anignorant little girl she'll think me for asking! No, it'll never do toask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so I soon begantalking again. Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I should think!(Dinah was the cat.) I hope they'll remember her saucer of milk attea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are nomice in the air, I'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's verylike a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder? And here Ibegan to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamysort of way, Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats? and sometimes, Dobats eat cats? for, you see, as she couldn't answer either question,it didn't much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozingoff, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand withDinah, and saying to her very earnestly, Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:did you ever eat a bat? when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upona heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

I was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was anotherlong passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.There was not a moment to be lost: away went I like the wind, andwas just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, Oh my earsand whiskers, how late it's getting! She was close behind it when sheturned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she foundherself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hangingfrom the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and whenI had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying everydoor, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever toget out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solidglass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and I'sfirst thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall;but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the secondtime round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, andbehind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried thelittle golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

I opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, notmuch larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passageinto the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out ofthat dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers andthose cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through thedoorway; and even if my head would go through, thought poor I, itwould be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I couldshut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin. For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately,that I had begun to think that very few things indeed were reallyimpossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she wentback to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or atany rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: thistime she found a little bottle on it, ['which certainly was not herebefore, said I,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paperlabel, with the words DRINK ME' beautifully printed on it in largeletters.

It was all very well to say Drink me, but the wise little I wasnot going to do THAT in a hurry. No, I'll look first, she said, andsee whether it's marked poison or not'; for she had read several nicelittle histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wildbeasts and other unpleasant things, all because they WOULD not rememberthe simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hotpoker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut yourfinger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had neverforgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked poison, it isalmost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked poison, so I ventured to tasteit, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavourof cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hotbuttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

What a curious feeling! said I; I must be shutting up like atelescope.

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her facebrightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for goingthrough the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, shewaited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:she felt a little nervous about this; for it might end, you know, saidI to herself, in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonderwhat I should be like then? And she tried to fancy what the flame of acandle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not rememberever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on goinginto the garden at once; but, alas for poor I! when she got to thedoor, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when shewent back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reachit: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried herbest to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thingsat down and cried.

Come, there's no use in crying like that! said I to herself,rather sharply; I advise you to leave off this minute! She generallygave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears intoher eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for havingcheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people. But it's no use now, thought poor I, to pretend to be two people!Why, there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words'EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants. Well, I'll eat it, saidI, and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if itmakes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I'llget into the garden, and I don't care which happens!

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, Which way? Whichway?, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it wasgrowing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the samesize: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Ihad got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-waythings to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go onin the common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

Curiouser and curiouser! cried I (she was so much surprised, thatfor the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); now I'mopening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out ofsight, they were getting so far off). Oh, my poor little feet, I wonderwho will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I'm sure_I_ shan't be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to troublemyself about you: you must manage the best way you can;-but I must bekind to them, thought I, or perhaps they won't walk the way I wantto go! Let me see: I'll give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. They mustgo by the carrier, she thought; and how funny it'll seem, sendingpresents to one's own feet! And how odd the directions will look!

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she wasnow more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little goldenkey and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor I! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, tolook through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was morehopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

You ought to be ashamed of yourself, said I, a great girl likeyou, (she might well say this), to go on crying in this way! Stop thismoment, I tell you! But she went on all the same, shedding gallons oftears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inchesdeep and reaching half down the hall.

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, andshe hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the WhiteRabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves inone hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a greathurry, muttering to himself as he came, Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess!Oh! won't she be savage if I've kept her waiting! I felt sodesperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbitcame near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, If you please, sir-The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan,and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

I took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, shekept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: Dear, dear! Howqueer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.I wonder if I've been changed in the night? Let me think: was I thesame when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling alittle different. But if I'm not the same, the next question is, Whoin the world am I? Ah, THAT'S the great puzzle! And she began thinkingover all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, tosee if she could have been changed for any of them.

I'm sure I'm not Ada, she said, for her hair goes in such longringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm sure I can'tbe Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such avery little! Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I, and-oh dear, how puzzlingit all is! I'll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let mesee: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, andfour times seven is-oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate!However, the Multiplication Table doesn't signify: let's try Geography.London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, andRome-no, THAT'S all wrong, I'm certain! I must have been changed forMabel! I'll try and say How doth the little-' and she crossed herhands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it,but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come thesame as they used to do:

I'm sure those are not the right words, said poor I, and her eyesfilled with tears again as she went on, I must be Mabel after all, andI shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next tono toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I'vemade up my mind about it; if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here! It'll be nouse their putting their heads down and saying Come up again, dear! Ishall only look up and say Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then,if I like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down heretill I'm somebody else-but, oh dear! cried I, with a sudden burstof tears, I do wish they WOULD put their heads down! I am so VERY tiredof being all alone here!

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to seethat she had put on one of the Rabbit's little white kid gloves whileshe was talking. How CAN I have done that? she thought. I mustbe growing small again. She got up and went to the table to measureherself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was nowabout two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon foundout that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she droppedit hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

That WAS a narrow escape! said I, a good deal frightened at thesudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; andnow for the garden! and she ran with all speed back to the little door:but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key waslying on the glass table as before, and things are worse than ever,thought the poor child, for I never was so small as this before, never!And I declare it's too bad, that it is!

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash!she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that shehad somehow fallen into the sea, and in that case I can go back byrailway, she said to herself. (I had been to the seaside once inher life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you goto on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in thesea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a rowof lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soonmade out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when shewas nine feet high.

I wish I hadn't cried so much! said I, as she swam about, tryingto find her way out. I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, bybeing drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure!However, everything is queer to-day.

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little wayoff, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thoughtit must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how smallshe was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that hadslipped in like herself.

Would it be of any use, now, thought I, to speak to this mouse?Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think verylikely it can talk: at any rate, there's no harm in trying. So shebegan: O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tiredof swimming about here, O Mouse! (I thought this must be the rightway of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, butshe remembered having seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, A mouse-ofa mouse-to a mouse-a mouse-O mouse!) The Mouse looked at her ratherinquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,but it said nothing.

Perhaps it doesn't understand English, thought I; I daresay it'sa French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror. (For, with allher knowledge of history, I had no very clear notion how long agoanything had happened.) So she began again: Ou est ma chatte? whichwas the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave asudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright. Oh, I beg your pardon! cried I hastily, afraid that she had hurtthe poor animal's feelings. I quite forgot you didn't like cats.

Not like cats! cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. WouldYOU like cats if you were me?

Well, perhaps not, said I in a soothing tone: don't be angryabout it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you'dtake a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quietthing, I went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in thepool, and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws andwashing her face-and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse-and she'ssuch a capital one for catching mice-oh, I beg your pardon! criedI again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and shefelt certain it must be really offended. We won't talk about her anymore if you'd rather not.

We indeed! cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of histail. As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always HATEDcats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don't let me hear the name again!

I won't indeed! said I, in a great hurry to change the subject ofconversation. Are you-are you fond-of-of dogs? The Mouse did notanswer, so I went on eagerly: There is such a nice little dog nearour house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, youknow, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it'll fetch things whenyou throw them, and it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sortsof things-I can't remember half of them-and it belongs to a farmer,you know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds! Hesays it kills all the rats and-oh dear! cried I in a sorrowfultone, I'm afraid I've offended it again! For the Mouse was swimmingaway from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion inthe pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, Mouse dear! Do come back again, and wewon't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't like them! When theMouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: itsface was quite pale (with passion, I thought), and it said in a lowtrembling voice, Let us get to the shore, and then I'll tell you myhistory, and you'll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with thebirds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo,a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. I led theway, and the whole party swam to the shore.

They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank-thebirds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging closeto them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had aconsultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite naturalto I to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she hadknown them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with theLory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, I am older thanyou, and must know better'; and this I would not allow withoutknowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell itsage, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,called out, Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! I'LL soon make youdry enough! They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mousein the middle. I kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she feltsure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

Ahem! said the Mouse with an important air, are you all ready? Thisis the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! Williamthe Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submittedto by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late muchaccustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls ofMercia and Northumbria-

Ugh! said the Lory, with a shiver.

I beg your pardon! said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: Didyou speak?

Not I! said the Lory hastily.

I thought you did, said the Mouse. -I proceed. Edwin and Morcar,the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand,the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable-

Found WHAT? said the Duck.

Found IT, the Mouse replied rather crossly: of course you know whatit means.

I know what it means well enough, when I find a thing, said theDuck: it's generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did thearchbishop find?

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, -foundit advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him thecrown. William's conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of hisNormans- How are you getting on now, my dear? it continued, turningto I as it spoke.

As wet as ever, said I in a melancholy tone: it doesn't seem todry me at all.

In that case, said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, I movethat the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energeticremedies-

Speak English! said the Eaglet. I don't know the meaning of halfthose long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do either! Andthe Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birdstittered audibly.

What I was going to say, said the Dodo in an offended tone, was, thatthe best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.

What IS a Caucus-race? said I; not that she wanted much to know,but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY ought to speak,and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

Why, said the Dodo, the best way to explain it is to do it. (And, asyou might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tellyou how the Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, ['the exactshape doesn't matter, it said,) and then all the party were placedalong the course, here and there. There was no One, two, three, andaway, but they began running when they liked, and left off when theyliked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again,the Dodo suddenly called out The race is over! and they all crowdedround it, panting, and asking, But who has won?

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought,and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead(the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the picturesof him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said,EVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes.

But who is to give the prizes? quite a chorus of voices asked.

Why, SHE, of course, said the Dodo, pointing to I with one finger;and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confusedway, Prizes! Prizes!

I had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in herpocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water hadnot got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly onea-piece all round.

But she must have a prize herself, you know, said the Mouse.

Of course, the Dodo replied very gravely. What else have you got inyour pocket? he went on, turning to I.

Only a thimble, said I sadly.

Hand it over here, said the Dodo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnlypresented the thimble, saying We beg your acceptance of this elegantthimble'; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.

I thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so gravethat she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anythingto say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as shecould.

The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise andconfusion, as the large birds complained that they could not tastetheirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, andbegged the Mouse to tell them something more.

You promised to tell me your history, you know, said I, and whyit is you hate-C and D, she added in a whisper, half afraid that itwould be offended again.

Mine is a long and a sad tale! said the Mouse, turning to I, andsighing.

It IS a long tail, certainly, said I, looking down with wonder atthe Mouse's tail; but why do you call it sad? And she kept on puzzlingabout it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale wassomething like this:

You are not attending! said the Mouse to I severely. What are youthinking of?

I beg your pardon, said I very humbly: you had got to the fifthbend, I think?

I had NOT! cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

A knot! said I, always ready to make herself useful, and lookinganxiously about her. Oh, do let me help to undo it!

I shall do nothing of the sort, said the Mouse, getting up and walkingaway. You insult me by talking such nonsense!

I didn't mean it! pleaded poor I. But you're so easily offended,you know!

The Mouse only growled in reply.

Please come back and finish your story! I called after it; and theothers all joined in chorus, Yes, please do! but the Mouse only shookits head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

What a pity it wouldn't stay! sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quiteout of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to herdaughter Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to loseYOUR temper! Hold your tongue, Ma! said the young Crab, a littlesnappishly. You're enough to try the patience of an oyster!

I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do! said I aloud, addressingnobody in particular. She'd soon fetch it back!

And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question? said theLory.

I replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet: Dinah's our cat. And she's such a capital one for catching mice youcan't think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of thebirds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up verycarefully, remarking, I really must be getting home; the night-airdoesn't suit my throat! and a Canary called out in a trembling voice toits children, Come away, my dears! It's high time you were all in bed!On various pretexts they all moved off, and I was soon left alone.

I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah! she said to herself in a melancholytone. Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's the bestcat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see youany more! And here poor I began to cry again, for she felt verylonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again hearda little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked upeagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was comingback to finish his story.

It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and lookinganxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heardit muttering to itself The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Ohmy fur and whiskers! She'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets areferrets! Where CAN I have dropped them, I wonder? I guessed in amoment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves,and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they werenowhere to be seen-everything seemed to have changed since her swim inthe pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door,had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed I, as she went hunting about, andcalled out to her in an angry tone, Why, Mary Ann, what ARE you doingout here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!Quick, now! And I was so much frightened that she ran off at oncein the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake ithad made.

He took me for his housemaid, she said to herself as she ran. Howsurprised he'll be when he finds out who I am! But I'd better take himhis fan and gloves-that is, if I can find them. As she said this, shecame upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brassplate with the name W. RABBIT' engraved upon it. She went in withoutknocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet thereal Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found thefan and gloves.

How queer it seems, I said to herself, to be going messages fora rabbit! I suppose Dinah'll be sending me on messages next! And shebegan fancying the sort of thing that would happen: Miss I! Comehere directly, and get ready for your walk! Coming in a minute,nurse! But I've got to see that the mouse doesn't get out. Only I don'tthink, I went on, that they'd let Dinah stop in the house if itbegan ordering people about like that!

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a tablein the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairsof tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves,and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a littlebottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label this timewith the words DRINK ME, but nevertheless she uncorked it and put itto her lips. I know SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen, she saidto herself, whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see whatthis bottle does. I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for reallyI'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she haddrunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily putdown the bottle, saying to herself That's quite enough-I hope I shan'tgrow any more-As it is, I can't get out at the door-I do wish I hadn'tdrunk quite so much!

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute therewas not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down withone elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm outof the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself Now Ican do no more, whatever happens. What WILL become of me?

Luckily for I, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as thereseemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the roomagain, no wonder she felt unhappy.

It was much pleasanter at home, thought poor I, when one wasn'talways growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice andrabbits. I almost wish I hadn't gone down that rabbit-hole-and yet-andyet-it's rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder whatCAN have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied thatkind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And when Igrow up, I'll write one-but I'm grown up now, she added in a sorrowfultone; at least there's no room to grow up any more HERE.

But then, thought I, shall I NEVER get any older than I amnow? That'll be a comfort, one way-never to be an old woman-butthen-always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn't like THAT!

Oh, you foolish I! she answered herself. How can you learnlessons in here? Why, there's hardly room for YOU, and no room at allfor any lesson-books!

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and makingquite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she hearda voice outside, and stopped to listen.

Mary Ann! Mary Ann! said the voice. Fetch me my gloves this moment!Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. I knew it wasthe Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook thehouse, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as largeas the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, asthe door opened inwards, and I's elbow was pressed hard against it,that attempt proved a failure. I heard it say to itself Then I'llgo round and get in at the window.

THAT you won't' thought I, and, after waiting till she fanciedshe heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out herhand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into acucumber-frame, or something of the sort.

Next came an angry voice-the Rabbit's-Pat! Pat! Where are you? Andthen a voice she had never heard before, Sure then I'm here! Diggingfor apples, yer honour!

Digging for apples, indeed! said the Rabbit angrily. Here! Come andhelp me out of THIS! (Sounds of more broken glass.)

Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window?

Sure, it's an arm, yer honour! (He pronounced it arrum. )

An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the wholewindow!

Sure, it does, yer honour: but it's an arm for all that.

Well, it's got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!

There was a long silence after this, and I could only hear whispersnow and then; such as, Sure, I don't like it, yer honour, at all, atall! Do as I tell you, you coward! and at last she spread out herhand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there wereTWO little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. What a number ofcucumber-frames there must be! thought I. I wonder what they'll donext! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD! I'msure I don't want to stay in here any longer!

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came arumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voicesall talking together: she made out the words: Where's the otherladder?-Why, I hadn't to bring but one; Bill's got the other-Bill!fetch it here, lad!-Here, put em up at this corner-No, tie emtogether first-they don't reach half high enough yet-Oh! they'lldo well enough; don't be particular-Here, Bill! catch hold of thisrope-Will the roof bear?-Mind that loose slate-Oh, it's comingdown! Heads below! (a loud crash)-Now, who did that?-It was Bill, Ifancy-Who's to go down the chimney?-Nay, I shan't! YOU do it!-That Iwon't, then!-Bill's to go down-Here, Bill! the master says you're togo down the chimney!

Oh! So Bill's got to come down the chimney, has he? said I toherself. Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn't be inBill's place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; butI THINK I can kick a little!

She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waitedtill she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what sort it was)scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,saying to herself This is Bill, she gave one sharp kick, and waited tosee what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of There goes Bill!then the Rabbit's voice along-Catch him, you by the hedge! thensilence, and then another confusion of voices-Hold up his head-Brandynow-Don't choke him-How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tellus all about it!

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, ['That's Bill, thoughtI,) Well, I hardly know-No more, thank ye; I'm better now-but I'ma deal too flustered to tell you-all I know is, something comes at melike a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!

So you did, old fellow! said the others.

We must burn the house down! said the Rabbit's voice; and I calledout as loud as she could, If you do. I'll set Dinah at you!

There was a dead silence instantly, and I thought to herself, Iwonder what they WILL do next! If they had any sense, they'd take theroof off. After a minute or two, they began moving about again, andI heard the Rabbit say, A barrowful will do, to begin with.

A barrowful of WHAT? thought I; but she had not long to doubt,for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at thewindow, and some of them hit her in the face. I'll put a stop to this,she said to herself, and shouted out, You'd better not do that again!which produced another dead silence.

I noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning intolittle cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into herhead. If I eat one of these cakes, she thought, it's sure to makeSOME change in my size; and as it can't possibly make me larger, it mustmake me smaller, I suppose.

So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that shebegan shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get throughthe door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of littleanimals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, wasin the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving itsomething out of a bottle. They all made a rush at I the moment sheappeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herselfsafe in a thick wood.

The first thing I've got to do, said I to herself, as she wanderedabout in the wood, is to grow to my right size again; and the secondthing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will bethe best plan.

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simplyarranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest ideahow to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously amongthe trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in agreat hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, andfeebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. Poor little thing!said I, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; butshe was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might behungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite ofall her coaxing.

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, andheld it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air offall its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,and made believe to worry it; then I dodged behind a great thistle,to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on theother side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled headover heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then I, thinking it wasvery like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting everymoment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; thenthe puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a verylittle way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarselyall the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, withits tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to I a good opportunity for making her escape; so sheset off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, andtill the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the distance.

And yet what a dear little puppy it was! said I, as she leantagainst a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of theleaves: I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if-if I'donly been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I'd nearly forgotten thatI've got to grow up again! Let me see-how IS it to be managed? Isuppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the greatquestion is, what?

The great question certainly was, what? I looked all round her atthe flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything thatlooked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height asherself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, andbehind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see whatwas on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of themushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar,that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a longhookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.

The Caterpillar and I looked at each other for some time in silence:at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressedher in a languid, sleepy voice.

Who are YOU? said the Caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. I replied,rather shyly, I-I hardly know, sir, just at present-at least I knowwho I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think I must have beenchanged several times since then.

What do you mean by that? said the Caterpillar sternly. Explainyourself!

I can't explain MYSELF, I'm afraid, sir' said I, because I'm notmyself, you see.

I don't see, said the Caterpillar.

I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly, I replied very politely,for I can't understand it myself to begin with; and being so manydifferent sizes in a day is very confusing.

It isn't, said the Caterpillar.

Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet, said I; but when youhave to turn into a chrysalis-you will some day, you know-and thenafter that into a butterfly, I should think you'll feel it a littlequeer, won't you?

Not a bit, said the Caterpillar.

Well, perhaps your feelings may be different, said I; all I knowis, it would feel very queer to ME.

You! said the Caterpillar contemptuously. Who are YOU?

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.I felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar's making such VERYshort remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, I think,you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.

Why? said the Caterpillar.

Here was another puzzling question; and as I could not think of anygood reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a VERY unpleasantstate of mind, she turned away.

Come back! the Caterpillar called after her. I've something importantto say!

This sounded promising, certainly: I turned and came back again.

Keep your temper, said the Caterpillar.

Is that all? said I, swallowing down her anger as well as shecould.

No, said the Caterpillar.

I thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, andperhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For someminutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded itsarms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, So you thinkyou're changed, do you?

I'm afraid I am, sir, said I; I can't remember things as Iused-and I don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!

Can't remember WHAT things? said the Caterpillar.

Well, I've tried to say HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE, but it all camedifferent! I replied in a very melancholy voice.

Repeat, YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM, said the Caterpillar.

I folded her hands, and began:

That is not said right, said the Caterpillar.

Not QUITE right, I'm afraid, said I, timidly; some of the wordshave got altered.

It is wrong from beginning to end, said the Caterpillar decidedly, andthere was silence for some minutes.

The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

What size do you want to be? it asked.

Oh, I'm not particular as to size, I hastily replied; only onedoesn't like changing so often, you know.

I DON'T know, said the Caterpillar.

I said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her lifebefore, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

Are you content now? said the Caterpillar.

Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you wouldn't mind,said I: three inches is such a wretched height to be.

It is a very good height indeed! said the Caterpillar angrily, rearingitself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

But I'm not used to it! pleaded poor I in a piteous tone. Andshe thought of herself, I wish the creatures wouldn't be so easilyoffended!

You'll get used to it in time, said the Caterpillar; and it put thehookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time I waited patiently until it chose to speak again. Ina minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouthand yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off themushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went,One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make yougrow shorter.

One side of WHAT? The other side of WHAT? thought I to herself.

Of the mushroom, said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked italoud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

I remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, tryingto make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectlyround, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last shestretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bitof the edge with each hand.

And now which is which? she said to herself, and nibbled a little ofthe right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violentblow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she feltthat there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so sheset to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressedso closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open hermouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of thelefthand bit.

Come, my head's free at last! said I in a tone of delight, whichchanged into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulderswere nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, wasan immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of asea of green leaves that lay far below her.

What CAN all that green stuff be? said I. And where HAVE myshoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can't see you?She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.

As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, shetried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that herneck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She hadjust succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was goingto dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the topsof the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss madeher draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, andwas beating her violently with its wings.

Serpent! screamed the Pigeon.

I'm NOT a serpent! said I indignantly. Let me alone!

Serpent, I say again! repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone,and added with a kind of sob, I've tried every way, and nothing seemsto suit them!

I haven't the least idea what you're talking about, said I.

I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've triedhedges, the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; but thoseserpents! There's no pleasing them!

I was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use insaying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs, said the Pigeon;'but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, Ihaven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!

I'm very sorry you've been annoyed, said I, who was beginning tosee its meaning.

And just as I'd taken the highest tree in the wood, continued thePigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, and just as I was thinking Ishould be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down fromthe sky! Ugh, Serpent!

But I'm NOT a serpent, I tell you! said I. I'm a-I'm a-

Well! WHAT are you? said the Pigeon. I can see you're trying toinvent something!

I-I'm a little girl, said I, rather doubtfully, as she rememberedthe number of changes she had gone through that day.

A likely story indeed! said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepestcontempt. I've seen a good many little girls in my time, but never ONEwith such a neck as that! No, no! You're a serpent; and there's no usedenying it. I suppose you'll be telling me next that you never tasted anegg!

I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly, said I, who was a very truthfulchild; but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, youknow.

I don't believe it, said the Pigeon; but if they do, why then they'rea kind of serpent, that's all I can say.

This was such a new idea to I, that she was quite silent for aminute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, You'relooking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and what does it matter to mewhether you're a little girl or a serpent?

It matters a good deal to ME, said I hastily; but I'm not lookingfor eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn't want YOURS: I don'tlike them raw.

Well, be off, then! said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settleddown again into its nest. I crouched down among the trees as well asshe could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, andevery now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while sheremembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, andshe set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at theother, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she hadsucceeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that itfelt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,and began talking to herself, as usual. Come, there's half my plan donenow! How puzzling all these changes are! I'm never sure what I'm goingto be, from one minute to another! However, I've got back to my rightsize: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden-how IS thatto be done, I wonder? As she said this, she came suddenly upon an openplace, with a little house in it about four feet high. Whoever livesthere, thought I, it'll never do to come upon them THIS size: why,I should frighten them out of their wits! So she began nibbling at therighthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till shehad brought herself down to nine inches high.

For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering whatto do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of thewood-(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him afish)-and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was openedby another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like afrog; and both footmen, I noticed, had powdered hair that curled allover their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about,and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,saying, in a solemn tone, For the Duchess. An invitation from the Queento play croquet. The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn tone,only changing the order of the words a little, From the Queen. Aninvitation for the Duchess to play croquet.

Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.

I laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into thewood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out theFish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near thedoor, staring stupidly up into the sky.

I went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

There's no sort of use in knocking, said the Footman, and that fortwo reasons. First, because I'm on the same side of the door as youare; secondly, because they're making such a noise inside, no one couldpossibly hear you. And certainly there was a most extraordinary noisegoing on within-a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and thena great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

Please, then, said I, how am I to get in?

There might be some sense in your knocking, the Footman went onwithout attending to her, if we had the door between us. For instance,if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know. He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and thisI thought decidedly uncivil. But perhaps he can't help it, shesaid to herself; his eyes are so VERY nearly at the top of his head.But at any rate he might answer questions.-How am I to get in? sherepeated, aloud.

I shall sit here, the Footman remarked, till tomorrow-

At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate cameskimming out, straight at the Footman's head: it just grazed his nose,and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.

-or next day, maybe, the Footman continued in the same tone, exactlyas if nothing had happened.

How am I to get in? asked I again, in a louder tone.

ARE you to get in at all? said the Footman. That's the firstquestion, you know.

It was, no doubt: only I did not like to be told so. It's reallydreadful, she muttered to herself, the way all the creatures argue.It's enough to drive one crazy!

The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating hisremark, with variations. I shall sit here, he said, on and off, fordays and days.

But what am I to do? said I.

Anything you like, said the Footman, and began whistling.

Oh, there's no use in talking to him, said I desperately: he'sperfectly idiotic! And she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke fromone end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool inthe middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirringa large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

There's certainly too much pepper in that soup! I said to herself,as well as she could for sneezing.

There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchesssneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howlingalternately without a moment's pause. The only things in the kitchenthat did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting onthe hearth and grinning from ear to ear.

Please would you tell me, said I, a little timidly, for she wasnot quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, whyyour cat grins like that?

It's a Cheshire cat, said the Duchess, and that's why. Pig!

She said the last word with such sudden violence that I quitejumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby,and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:

I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn't knowthat cats COULD grin.

They all can, said the Duchess; and most of em do.

I don't know of any that do, I said very politely, feeling quitepleased to have got into a conversation.

You don't know much, said the Duchess; and that's a fact.

I did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it wouldbe as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While shewas trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off thefire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach atthe Duchess and the baby-the fire-irons came first; then followed ashower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice ofthem even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

Oh, PLEASE mind what you're doing! cried I, jumping up and down inan agony of terror. Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS nose'; as an unusuallylarge saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.

If everybody minded their own business, the Duchess said in a hoarsegrowl, the world would go round a deal faster than it does.

Which would NOT be an advantage, said I, who felt very glad to getan opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. Just think ofwhat work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takestwenty-four hours to turn round on its axis-

Talking of axes, said the Duchess, chop off her head!

I glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to takethe hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not tobe listening, so she went on again: Twenty-four hours, I THINK; or isit twelve? I-

Oh, don't bother ME, said the Duchess; I never could abide figures!And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort oflullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end ofevery line:

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossingthe baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,that I could hardly hear the words:

Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like! the Duchess said to I,flinging the baby at her as she spoke. I must go and get ready to playcroquet with the Queen, and she hurried out of the room. The cook threwa frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

I caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shapedlittle creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, justlike a star-fish, thought I. The poor little thing was snortinglike a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up andstraightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minuteor two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was totwist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its rightear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carriedit out into the open air. IF I don't take this child away with me,thought I, they're sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn't it bemurder to leave it behind? She said the last words out loud, and thelittle thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time). Don't grunt, said I; that's not at all a proper way of expressingyourself.

The baby grunted again, and I looked very anxiously into its face tosee what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it hada VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also itseyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether I did notlike the look of the thing at all. But perhaps it was only sobbing,she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were anytears.

No, there were no tears. If you're going to turn into a pig, my dear,said I, seriously, I'll have nothing more to do with you. Mindnow! The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossibleto say which), and they went on for some while in silence.

I was just beginning to think to herself, Now, what am I to do withthis creature when I get it home? when it grunted again, so violently,that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there couldbe NO mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and shefelt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to seeit trot away quietly into the wood. If it had grown up, she saidto herself, it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makesrather a handsome pig, I think. And she began thinking over otherchildren she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just sayingto herself, if one only knew the right way to change them- when shewas a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of atree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw I. It looked good-natured, shethought: still it had VERY long claws and a great many teeth, so shefelt that it ought to be treated with respect.

Cheshire Puss, she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all knowwhether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider. Come, it's pleased so far, thought I, and she went on. Would youtell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?

That depends a good deal on where you want to get to, said the Cat.

I don't much care where- said I.

Then it doesn't matter which way you go, said the Cat.

-so long as I get SOMEWHERE, I added as an explanation.

Oh, you're sure to do that, said the Cat, if you only walk longenough.

I felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question. What sort of people live about here?

In THAT direction, the Cat said, waving its right paw round, livesa Hatter: and in THAT direction, waving the other paw, lives a MarchHare. Visit either you like: they're both mad.

But I don't want to go among mad people, I remarked.

Oh, you can't help that, said the Cat: we're all mad here. I'm mad.You're mad.

How do you know I'm mad? said I.

You must be, said the Cat, or you wouldn't have come here.

I didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on And howdo you know that you're mad?

To begin with, said the Cat, a dog's not mad. You grant that?

I suppose so, said I.

Well, then, the Cat went on, you see, a dog growls when it's angry,and wags its tail when it's pleased. Now I growl when I'm pleased, andwag my tail when I'm angry. Therefore I'm mad.

I call it purring, not growling, said I.

Call it what you like, said the Cat. Do you play croquet with theQueen to-day?

I should like it very much, said I, but I haven't been invitedyet.

You'll see me there, said the Cat, and vanished.

I was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queerthings happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been,it suddenly appeared again.

By-the-bye, what became of the baby? said the Cat. I'd nearlyforgotten to ask.

It turned into a pig, I quietly said, just as if it had come backin a natural way.

I thought it would, said the Cat, and vanished again.

I waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did notappear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction inwhich the March Hare was said to live. I've seen hatters before, shesaid to herself; the March Hare will be much the most interesting, andperhaps as this is May it won't be raving mad-at least not so mad asit was in March. As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Catagain, sitting on a branch of a tree.

Did you say pig, or fig? said the Cat.

I said pig, replied I; and I wish you wouldn't keep appearing andvanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.

All right, said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, whichremained some time after the rest of it had gone.

Well! I've often seen a cat without a grin, thought I; but a grinwithout a cat! It's the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!

She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the houseof the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because thechimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. Itwas so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she hadnibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself toabout two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly,saying to herself Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almostwish I'd gone to see the Hatter instead!

There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and theMarch Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sittingbetween them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as acushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. Veryuncomfortable for the Dormouse, thought I; only, as it's asleep, Isuppose it doesn't mind.

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together atone corner of it: No room! No room! they cried out when they saw Icoming. There's PLENTY of room! said I indignantly, and she satdown in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

Have some wine, the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

I looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea. I don't see any wine, she remarked.

There isn't any, said the March Hare.

Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it, said I angrily.

It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being invited, saidthe March Hare.

I didn't know it was YOUR table, said I; it's laid for a greatmany more than three.

Your hair wants cutting, said the Hatter. He had been looking at Ifor some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.

You should learn not to make personal remarks, I said with someseverity; it's very rude.

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he SAIDwas, Why is a raven like a writing-desk?

Come, we shall have some fun now! thought I. I'm glad they'vebegun asking riddles.-I believe I can guess that, she added aloud.

Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it? said theMarch Hare.

Exactly so, said I.

Then you should say what you mean, the March Hare went on.

I do, I hastily replied; at least-at least I mean what Isay-that's the same thing, you know.

Not the same thing a bit! said the Hatter. You might just as well saythat I see what I eat is the same thing as I eat what I see!

You might just as well say, added the March Hare, that I like what Iget is the same thing as I get what I like!

You might just as well say, added the Dormouse, who seemed to betalking in his sleep, that I breathe when I sleep is the same thingas I sleep when I breathe!

It IS the same thing with you, said the Hatter, and here theconversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Ithought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks,which wasn't much.

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. What day of the monthis it? he said, turning to I: he had taken his watch out of hispocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,and holding it to his ear.

I considered a little, and then said The fourth.

Two days wrong! sighed the Hatter. I told you butter wouldn't suitthe works! he added looking angrily at the March Hare.

It was the BEST butter, the March Hare meekly replied.

Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well, the Hatter grumbled: you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife.

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dippedit into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think ofnothing better to say than his first remark, It was the BEST butter,you know.

I had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. What afunny watch! she remarked. It tells the day of the month, and doesn'ttell what o'clock it is!

Why should it? muttered the Hatter. Does YOUR watch tell you whatyear it is?

Of course not, I replied very readily: but that's because itstays the same year for such a long time together.

Which is just the case with MINE, said the Hatter.

I felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter's remark seemed to have nosort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. I don't quiteunderstand you, she said, as politely as she could.

The Dormouse is asleep again, said the Hatter, and he poured a littlehot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening itseyes, Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.

Have you guessed the riddle yet? the Hatter said, turning to Iagain.

No, I give it up, I replied: what's the answer?

I haven't the slightest idea, said the Hatter.

Nor I, said the March Hare.

I sighed wearily. I think you might do something better with thetime, she said, than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.

If you knew Time as well as I do, said the Hatter, you wouldn't talkabout wasting IT. It's HIM.

I don't know what you mean, said I.

Of course you don't! the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously. I dare say you never even spoke to Time!

Perhaps not, I cautiously replied: but I know I have to beat timewhen I learn music.

Ah! that accounts for it, said the Hatter. He won't stand beating.Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost anythingyou liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o'clock inthe morning, just time to begin lessons: you'd only have to whisper ahint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,time for dinner!

['I only wish it was, the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)

That would be grand, certainly, said I thoughtfully: but then-Ishouldn't be hungry for it, you know.

Not at first, perhaps, said the Hatter: but you could keep it tohalf-past one as long as you liked.

Is that the way YOU manage? I asked.

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. Not I! he replied. Wequarrelled last March-just before HE went mad, you know- (pointingwith his tea spoon at the March Hare,) -it was at the great concertgiven by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

You know the song, perhaps?

I've heard something like it, said I.

It goes on, you know, the Hatter continued, in this way:

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep Twinkle,twinkle, twinkle, twinkle- and went on so long that they had to pinchit to make it stop.

Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse, said the Hatter, when theQueen jumped up and bawled out, He's murdering the time! Off with hishead!

How dreadfully savage! exclaimed I.

And ever since that, the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, he won'tdo a thing I ask! It's always six o'clock now.

A bright idea came into I's head. Is that the reason so manytea-things are put out here? she asked.

Yes, that's it, said the Hatter with a sigh: it's always tea-time,and we've no time to wash the things between whiles.

Then you keep moving round, I suppose? said I.

Exactly so, said the Hatter: as the things get used up.

But what happens when you come to the beginning again? I venturedto ask.

Suppose we change the subject, the March Hare interrupted, yawning. I'm getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.

I'm afraid I don't know one, said I, rather alarmed at theproposal.

Then the Dormouse shall! they both cried. Wake up, Dormouse! Andthey pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. I wasn't asleep, he said in ahoarse, feeble voice: I heard every word you fellows were saying.

Tell us a story! said the March Hare.

Yes, please do! pleaded I.

And be quick about it, added the Hatter, or you'll be asleep againbefore it's done.

Once upon a time there were three little sisters, the Dormouse beganin a great hurry; and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; andthey lived at the bottom of a well-

What did they live on? said I, who always took a great interest inquestions of eating and drinking.

They lived on treacle, said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute ortwo.

They couldn't have done that, you know, I gently remarked; they'dhave been ill.

So they were, said the Dormouse; VERY ill.

I tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways ofliving would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: Butwhy did they live at the bottom of a well?

Take some more tea, the March Hare said to I, very earnestly.

I've had nothing yet, I replied in an offended tone, so I can'ttake more.

You mean you can't take LESS, said the Hatter: it's very easy to takeMORE than nothing.

Nobody asked YOUR opinion, said I.

Who's making personal remarks now? the Hatter asked triumphantly.

I did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herselfto some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, andrepeated her question. Why did they live at the bottom of a well?

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and thensaid, It was a treacle-well.

There's no such thing! I was beginning very angrily, but theHatter and the March Hare went Sh! sh! and the Dormouse sulkilyremarked, If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the story foryourself.

No, please go on! I said very humbly; I won't interrupt again. I dare say there may be ONE.

One, indeed! said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented togo on. And so these three little sisters-they were learning to draw,you know-

What did they draw? said I, quite forgetting her promise.

Treacle, said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

I want a clean cup, interrupted the Hatter: let's all move one placeon.

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Haremoved into the Dormouse's place, and I rather unwillingly tookthe place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got anyadvantage from the change: and I was a good deal worse off thanbefore, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.

I did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began verycautiously: But I don't understand. Where did they draw the treaclefrom?

You can draw water out of a water-well, said the Hatter; so I shouldthink you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well-eh, stupid?

But they were IN the well, I said to the Dormouse, not choosing tonotice this last remark.

Of course they were, said the Dormouse; -well in.

This answer so confused poor I, that she let the Dormouse go on forsome time without interrupting it.

They were learning to draw, the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbingits eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; and they drew all manner ofthings-everything that begins with an M-

Why with an M? said I.

Why not? said the March Hare.

I was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off intoa doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again witha little shriek, and went on: -that begins with an M, such as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness-you know you saythings are much of a muchness-did you ever see such a thing as adrawing of a muchness?

Really, now you ask me, said I, very much confused, I don'tthink-

Then you shouldn't talk, said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than I could bear: she got up ingreat disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, andneither of the others took the least notice of her going, though shelooked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse intothe teapot.

At any rate I'll never go THERE again! said I as she picked herway through the wood. It's the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in allmy life!

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a doorleading right into it. That's very curious! she thought. Buteverything's curious today. I think I may as well go in at once. And inshe went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the littleglass table. Now, I'll manage better this time, she said to herself,and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door thatled into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (shehad kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:then she walked down the little passage: and THEN-she found herself atlast in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the coolfountains.

A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the rosesgrowing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busilypainting them red. I thought this a very curious thing, and she wentnearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one ofthem say, Look out now, Five! Don't go splashing paint over me like that!

I couldn't help it, said Five, in a sulky tone; Seven jogged myelbow.

On which Seven looked up and said, That's right, Five! Always lay theblame on others!

YOU'D better not talk! said Five. I heard the Queen say onlyyesterday you deserved to be beheaded!

What for? said the one who had spoken first.

That's none of YOUR business, Two! said Seven.

Yes, it IS his business! said Five, and I'll tell him-it was forbringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun Well, of all the unjustthings- when his eye chanced to fall upon I, as she stood watchingthem, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, andall of them bowed low.

Would you tell me, said I, a little timidly, why you are paintingthose roses?

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a lowvoice, Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been aRED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queenwas to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.So you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to- At thismoment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, calledout The Queen! The Queen! and the three gardeners instantly threwthemselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,and I looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped likethe three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at thecorners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over withdiamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these camethe royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears camejumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamentedwith hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and amongthem I recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurriednervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by withoutnoticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King'scrown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grandprocession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

I was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her facelike the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heardof such a rule at processions; and besides, what would be the use ofa procession, thought she, if people had all to lie down upon theirfaces, so that they couldn't see it? So she stood still where she was,and waited.

When the procession came opposite to I, they all stopped and lookedat her, and the Queen said severely Who is this? She said it to theKnave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

Idiot! said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning toI, she went on, What's your name, child?

My name is I, so please your Majesty, said I very politely;but she added, to herself, Why, they're only a pack of cards, afterall. I needn't be afraid of them!

And who are THESE? said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners whowere lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on theirfaces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of thepack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, orcourtiers, or three of her own children.

How should I know? said I, surprised at her own courage. It's nobusiness of MINE.

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for amoment like a wild beast, screamed Off with her head! Off-

Nonsense! said I, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen wassilent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said Consider, mydear: she is only a child!

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave Turn themover!

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

Get up! said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the threegardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,the royal children, and everybody else.

Leave off that! screamed the Queen. You make me giddy. And then,turning to the rose-tree, she went on, What HAVE you been doing here?

May it please your Majesty, said Two, in a very humble tone, goingdown on one knee as he spoke, we were trying-

I see! said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses. Off with their heads! and the procession moved on, three of thesoldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ranto I for protection.

You shan't be beheaded! said I, and she put them into a largeflower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for aminute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after theothers.

Are their heads off? shouted the Queen.

Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty! the soldiers shoutedin reply.

That's right! shouted the Queen. Can you play croquet?

The soldiers were silent, and looked at I, as the question wasevidently meant for her.

Yes! shouted I.

Come on, then! roared the Queen, and I joined the procession,wondering very much what would happen next.

It's-it's a very fine day! said a timid voice at her side. She waswalking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

Very, said I: -where's the Duchess?

Hush! Hush! said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He lookedanxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upontiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered She's undersentence of execution.

What for? said I.

Did you say What a pity!? the Rabbit asked.

No, I didn't, said I: I don't think it's at all a pity. I said What for?

She boxed the Queen's ears- the Rabbit began. I gave a littlescream of laughter. Oh, hush! the Rabbit whispered in a frightenedtone. The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and theQueen said-

Get to your places! shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, andpeople began running about in all directions, tumbling up against eachother; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the gamebegan. I thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground inher life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs,the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselvesup and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty I found at first was in managing her flamingo:she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, underher arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had gotits neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog ablow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face,with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting outlaughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to beginagain, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolleditself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there wasgenerally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send thehedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting upand walking off to other parts of the ground, I soon came to theconclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrellingall the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very shorttime the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, andshouting Off with his head! or Off with her head! about once in aminute.

I began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had anydispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,and then, thought she, what would become of me? They're dreadfullyfond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there's any oneleft alive!

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether shecould get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearancein the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching ita minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself'It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.

How are you getting on? said the Cat, as soon as there was mouthenough for it to speak with.

I waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. It's no usespeaking to it, she thought, till its ears have come, or at least oneof them. In another minute the whole head appeared, and then I putdown her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very gladshe had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there wasenough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

I don't think they play at all fairly, I began, in rather acomplaining tone, and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hearoneself speak-and they don't seem to have any rules in particular;at least, if there are, nobody attends to them-and you've no idea howconfusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there's thearch I've got to go through next walking about at the other end of theground-and I should have croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, onlyit ran away when it saw mine coming!

How do you like the Queen? said the Cat in a low voice.

Not at all, said I: she's so extremely- Just then she noticedthat the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,-likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game.

The Queen smiled and passed on.

Who ARE you talking to? said the King, going up to I, and lookingat the Cat's head with great curiosity.

It's a friend of mine-a Cheshire Cat, said I: allow me tointroduce it.

I don't like the look of it at all, said the King: however, it maykiss my hand if it likes.

I'd rather not, the Cat remarked.

Don't be impertinent, said the King, and don't look at me like that!He got behind I as he spoke.

A cat may look at a king, said I. I've read that in some book,but I don't remember where.

Well, it must be removed, said the King very decidedly, and he calledthe Queen, who was passing at the moment, My dear! I wish you wouldhave this cat removed!

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small. Off with his head! she said, without even looking round.

I'll fetch the executioner myself, said the King eagerly, and hehurried off.

I thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was goingon, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming withpassion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to beexecuted for having missed their turns, and she did not like the lookof things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knewwhether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemedto I an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with theother: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to theother side of the garden, where I could see it trying in a helplesssort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fightwas over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: but it doesn'tmatter much, thought I, as all the arches are gone from this sideof the ground. So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might notescape again, and went back for a little more conversation with herfriend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite alarge crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on betweenthe executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment I appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settlethe question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as theyall spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactlywhat they said.

The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unlessthere was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such athing before, and he wasn't going to begin at HIS time of life.

The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could bebeheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in lessthan no time she'd have everybody executed, all round. (It was this lastremark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

I could think of nothing else to say but It belongs to the Duchess:you'd better ask HER about it.

She's in prison, the Queen said to the executioner: fetch her here. And the executioner went off like an arrow.

The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirelydisappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and downlooking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.

You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into I's, andthey walked off together.

I was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thoughtto herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her sosavage when they met in the kitchen.

When I'M a Duchess, she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tonethough), I won't have any pepper in my kitchen AT ALL. Soup does verywell without-Maybe it's always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind ofrule, and vinegar that makes them sour-and camomile that makesthem bitter-and-and barley-sugar and such things that make childrensweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldn't be sostingy about it, you know-

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a littlestartled when she heard her voice close to her ear. You're thinkingabout something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can'ttell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it ina bit.

Perhaps it hasn't one, I ventured to remark.

Tut, tut, child! said the Duchess. Everything's got a moral, if onlyyou can find it. And she squeezed herself up closer to I's side asshe spoke.

I did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because theDuchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly theright height to rest her chin upon I's shoulder, and it was anuncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so shebore it as well as she could.

The game's going on rather better now, she said, by way of keeping upthe conversation a little.

'Tis so, said the Duchess: and the moral of that is-Oh, tis love,tis love, that makes the world go round!

Somebody said, I whispered, that it's done by everybody mindingtheir own business!

Ah, well! It means much the same thing, said the Duchess, digging hersharp little chin into I's shoulder as she added, and the moralof THAT is-Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care ofthemselves.

How fond she is of finding morals in things! I thought to herself.

I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your waist,the Duchess said after a pause: the reason is, that I'm doubtful aboutthe temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?

HE might bite, I cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious tohave the experiment tried.

Very true, said the Duchess: flamingoes and mustard both bite. Andthe moral of that is-Birds of a feather flock together.

Only mustard isn't a bird, I remarked.

Right, as usual, said the Duchess: what a clear way you have ofputting things!

It's a mineral, I THINK, said I.

Of course it is, said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree toeverything that I said; there's a large mustard-mine near here. Andthe moral of that is-The more there is of mine, the less there is ofyours.

Oh, I know! exclaimed I, who had not attended to this last remark,it's a vegetable. It doesn't look like one, but it is.

I quite agree with you, said the Duchess; and the moral of thatis-Be what you would seem to be-or if you'd like it put moresimply-Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it mightappear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwisethan what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.

I think I should understand that better, I said very politely, ifI had it written down: but I can't quite follow it as you say it.

That's nothing to what I could say if I chose, the Duchess replied, ina pleased tone.

Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that, saidI.

Oh, don't talk about trouble! said the Duchess. I make you a presentof everything I've said as yet.

A cheap sort of present! thought I. I'm glad they don't givebirthday presents like that! But she did not venture to say it outloud.

Thinking again? the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharplittle chin.

I've a right to think, said I sharply, for she was beginning tofeel a little worried.

Just about as much right, said the Duchess, as pigs have to fly; andthe m-

But here, to I's great surprise, the Duchess's voice died away, evenin the middle of her favourite word moral, and the arm that was linkedinto hers began to tremble. I looked up, and there stood the Queenin front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.

A fine day, your Majesty! the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

Now, I give you fair warning, shouted the Queen, stamping on theground as she spoke; either you or your head must be off, and that inabout half no time! Take your choice!

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

Let's go on with the game, the Queen said to I; and I wastoo much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to thecroquet-ground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's absence, and wereresting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurriedback to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment's delay wouldcost them their lives.

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling withthe other players, and shouting Off with his head! or Off with herhead! Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers,who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that bythe end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all theplayers, except the King, the Queen, and I, were in custody andunder sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to I, Haveyou seen the Mock Turtle yet?

No, said I. I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is.

It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from, said the Queen.

I never saw one, or heard of one, said I.

Come on, then, said the Queen, and he shall tell you his history,

As they walked off together, I heard the King say in a low voice,to the company generally, You are all pardoned. Come, THAT'S a goodthing! she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at thenumber of executions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun.(IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) Up, lazything! said the Queen, and take this young lady to see the MockTurtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after someexecutions I have ordered'; and she walked off, leaving I alone withthe Gryphon. I did not quite like the look of the creature, but onthe whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to goafter that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen tillshe was out of sight: then it chuckled. What fun! said the Gryphon,half to itself, half to I.

What IS the fun? said I.

Why, SHE, said the Gryphon. It's all her fancy, that: they neverexecutes nobody, you know. Come on!

Everybody says come on! here, thought I, as she went slowlyafter it: I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they camenearer, I could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. Shepitied him deeply. What is his sorrow? she asked the Gryphon, and theGryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, It's all hisfancy, that: he hasn't got no sorrow, you know. Come on!

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyesfull of tears, but said nothing.

This here young lady, said the Gryphon, she wants for to know yourhistory, she do.

I'll tell it her, said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: sitdown, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've finished.

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. I thought toherself, I don't see how he can EVEN finish, if he doesn't begin. Butshe waited patiently.

Once, said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, I was a realTurtle.

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by anoccasional exclamation of Hjckrrh! from the Gryphon, and the constantheavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. I was very nearly getting up andsaying, Thank you, sir, for your interesting story, but she couldnot help thinking there MUST be more to come, so she sat still and saidnothing.

When we were little, the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,though still sobbing a little now and then, we went to school in thesea. The master was an old Turtle-we used to call him Tortoise-

Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one? I asked.

We called him Tortoise because he taught us, said the Mock Turtleangrily: really you are very dull!

You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poorI, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon saidto the Mock Turtle, Drive on, old fellow! Don't be all day about it!and he went on in these words:

Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe it-

I never said I didn't! interrupted I.

You did, said the Mock Turtle.

Hold your tongue! added the Gryphon, before I could speak again.The Mock Turtle went on.

We had the best of educations-in fact, we went to school every day-

I'VE been to a day-school, too, said I; you needn't be so proudas all that.

With extras? asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

Yes, said I, we learned French and music.

And washing? said the Mock Turtle.

Certainly not! said I indignantly.

Ah! then yours wasn't a really good school, said the Mock Turtle ina tone of great relief. Now at OURS they had at the end of the bill,French, music, AND WASHING-extra.

You couldn't have wanted it much, said I; living at the bottom ofthe sea.

I couldn't afford to learn it. said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. Ionly took the regular course.

What was that? inquired I.

Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with, the Mock Turtlereplied; and then the different branches of Arithmetic-Ambition,Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.

I never heard of Uglification, I ventured to say. What is it?

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. What! Never heard ofuglifying! it exclaimed. You know what to beautify is, I suppose?

Yes, said I doubtfully: it means-to-make-anything-prettier.

Well, then, the Gryphon went on, if you don't know what to uglify is,you ARE a simpleton.

I did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so sheturned to the Mock Turtle, and said What else had you to learn?

Well, there was Mystery, the Mock Turtle replied, counting offthe subjects on his flappers, -Mystery, ancient and modern, withSeaography: then Drawling-the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawling, Stretching, andFainting in Coils.

What was THAT like? said I.

Well, I can't show it you myself, the Mock Turtle said: I'm toostiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.

Hadn't time, said the Gryphon: I went to the Classics master, though.He was an old crab, HE was.

I never went to him, the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: he taughtLaughing and Grief, they used to say.

So he did, so he did, said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and bothcreatures hid their faces in their paws.

And how many hours a day did you do lessons? said I, in a hurry tochange the subject.

Ten hours the first day, said the Mock Turtle: nine the next, and soon.

What a curious plan! exclaimed I.

That's the reason they're called lessons, the Gryphon remarked: because they lessen from day to day.

This was quite a new idea to I, and she thought it over a littlebefore she made her next remark. Then the eleventh day must have been aholiday?

Of course it was, said the Mock Turtle.

And how did you manage on the twelfth? I went on eagerly.

That's enough about lessons, the Gryphon interrupted in a very decidedtone: tell her something about the games now.

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper acrosshis eyes. He looked at I, and tried to speak, but for a minute ortwo sobs choked his voice. Same as if he had a bone in his throat,said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him inthe back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tearsrunning down his cheeks, he went on again:

You may not have lived much under the sea- ['I haven't, saidI)-and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster-(I began to say I once tasted- but checked herself hastily, andsaid No, never') -so you can have no idea what a delightful thing aLobster Quadrille is!

No, indeed, said I. What sort of a dance is it?

Why, said the Gryphon, you first form into a line along thesea-shore-

Two lines! cried the Mock Turtle. Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way-

THAT generally takes some time, interrupted the Gryphon.

-you advance twice-

Each with a lobster as a partner! cried the Gryphon.

Of course, the Mock Turtle said: advance twice, set to partners-

-change lobsters, and retire in same order, continued the Gryphon.

Then, you know, the Mock Turtle went on, you throw the-

The lobsters! shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

-as far out to sea as you can-

Swim after them! screamed the Gryphon.

Turn a somersault in the sea! cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildlyabout.

Change lobsters again! yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

Back to land again, and that's all the first figure, said the MockTurtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had beenjumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadlyand quietly, and looked at I.

It must be a very pretty dance, said I timidly.

Would you like to see a little of it? said the Mock Turtle.

Very much indeed, said I.

Come, let's try the first figure! said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon. We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?

Oh, YOU sing, said the Gryphon. I've forgotten the words.

So they began solemnly dancing round and round I, every now andthen treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving theirforepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowlyand sadly:

Will you walk a little faster? said a whiting to a snail. There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.

See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance! They are waiting on the shingle-will you come and join the dance?

Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance? Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?

You can really have no notion how delightful it will be When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea! But the snail replied Too far, too far! and gave a look askance- Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.

Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance. Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

What matters it how far we go? his scaly friend replied. There is another shore, you know, upon the other side. The further off from England the nearer is to France- Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance? Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?

Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch, said I, feelingvery glad that it was over at last: and I do so like that curious songabout the whiting!

Oh, as to the whiting, said the Mock Turtle, they-you've seen them,of course?

Yes, said I, I've often seen them at dinn- she checked herselfhastily.

I don't know where Dinn may be, said the Mock Turtle, but if you'veseen them so often, of course you know what they're like.

I believe so, I replied thoughtfully. They have their tails intheir mouths-and they're all over crumbs.

You're wrong about the crumbs, said the Mock Turtle: crumbs would allwash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails in their mouths; and thereason is- here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.-Tell herabout the reason and all that, he said to the Gryphon.

The reason is, said the Gryphon, that they WOULD go with the lobstersto the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a longway. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn't getthem out again. That's all.

Thank you, said I, it's very interesting. I never knew so muchabout a whiting before.

I can tell you more than that, if you like, said the Gryphon. Do youknow why it's called a whiting?

I never thought about it, said I. Why?

IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES. the Gryphon replied very solemnly.

I was thoroughly puzzled. Does the boots and shoes! she repeatedin a wondering tone.

Why, what are YOUR shoes done with? said the Gryphon. I mean, whatmakes them so shiny?

I looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave heranswer. They're done with blacking, I believe.

Boots and shoes under the sea, the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,are done with a whiting. Now you know.

And what are they made of? I asked in a tone of great curiosity.

Soles and eels, of course, the Gryphon replied rather impatiently: any shrimp could have told you that.

If I'd been the whiting, said I, whose thoughts were still runningon the song, I'd have said to the porpoise, Keep back, please: wedon't want YOU with us!

They were obliged to have him with them, the Mock Turtle said: nowise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.

Wouldn't it really? said I in a tone of great surprise.

Of course not, said the Mock Turtle: why, if a fish came to ME, andtold me he was going a journey, I should say With what porpoise?

Don't you mean purpose? said I.

I mean what I say, the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. Andthe Gryphon added Come, let's hear some of YOUR adventures.

I could tell you my adventures-beginning from this morning, saidI a little timidly: but it's no use going back to yesterday,because I was a different person then.

Explain all that, said the Mock Turtle.

No, no! The adventures first, said the Gryphon in an impatient tone: explanations take such a dreadful time.

So I began telling them her adventures from the time when she firstsaw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and openedtheir eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she wenton. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part abouther repeating YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM, to the Caterpillar, and thewords all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath,and said That's very curious.

It's all about as curious as it can be, said the Gryphon.

It all came different! the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. Ishould like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her tobegin. He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind ofauthority over I.

Stand up and repeat 'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD, said theGryphon.

How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!thought I; I might as well be at school at once. However, shegot up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the LobsterQuadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words camevery queer indeed:

That's different from what I used to say when I was a child, said theGryphon.

Well, I never heard it before, said the Mock Turtle; but it soundsuncommon nonsense.

I said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again.

I should like to have it explained, said the Mock Turtle.

She can't explain it, said the Gryphon hastily. Go on with the nextverse.

But about his toes? the Mock Turtle persisted. How COULD he turn themout with his nose, you know?

It's the first position in dancing. I said; but was dreadfullypuzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

Go on with the next verse, the Gryphon repeated impatiently: itbegins I passed by his garden.

I did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all comewrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:

I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye, How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie-

What IS the use of repeating all that stuff, the Mock Turtleinterrupted, if you don't explain it as you go on? It's by far the mostconfusing thing I ever heard!

Yes, I think you'd better leave off, said the Gryphon: and I wasonly too glad to do so.

Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille? the Gryphon wenton. Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?

Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind, Ireplied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her Turtle Soup, will you, oldfellow?

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes chokedwith sobs, to sing this:

Beautiful Soup, so rich and green, Waiting in a hot tureen! Who for such dainties would not stoop? Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! Beau-ootiful Soo-oop! Beau-ootiful Soo-oop! Soo-oop of the e-e-evening, Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish, Game, or any other dish? Who would not give all else for two Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup? Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup? Beau-ootiful Soo-oop! Beau-ootiful Soo-oop! Soo-oop of the e-e-evening, Beautiful, beauti-FUL SOUP!

Chorus again! cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begunto repeat it, when a cry of The trial's beginning! was heard in thedistance.

Come on! cried the Gryphon, and, taking I by the hand, it hurriedoff, without waiting for the end of the song.

What trial is it? I panted as she ran; but the Gryphon onlyanswered Come on! and ran the faster, while more and more faintlycame, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:

Soo-oop of the e-e-evening, Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when theyarrived, with a great crowd assembled about them-all sorts of littlebirds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave wasstanding before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guardhim; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand,and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the courtwas a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good,that it made I quite hungry to look at them-I wish they'd get thetrial done, she thought, and hand round the refreshments! But thereseemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything abouther, to pass away the time.

I had never been in a court of justice before, but she had readabout them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knewthe name of nearly everything there. That's the judge, she said toherself, because of his great wig.

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over thewig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he didnot look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

And that's the jury-box, thought I, and those twelve creatures,(she was obliged to say creatures, you see, because some of them wereanimals, and some were birds,) I suppose they are the jurors. She saidthis last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud ofit: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of herage knew the meaning of it at all. However, jury-men' would have donejust as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. What are theydoing? I whispered to the Gryphon. They can't have anything to putdown yet, before the trial's begun.

They're putting down their names, the Gryphon whispered in reply, forfear they should forget them before the end of the trial.

Stupid things! I began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stoppedhastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, Silence in the court! and theKing put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out whowas talking.

I could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,that all the jurors were writing down stupid things! on their slates,and she could even make out that one of them didn't know how to spell'stupid, and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. A nicemuddle their slates'll be in before the trial's over! thought I.

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Icould not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, andvery soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quicklythat the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make outat all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he wasobliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this wasof very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

Herald, read the accusation! said the King.

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and thenunrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:

Consider your verdict, the King said to the jury.

Not yet, not yet! the Rabbit hastily interrupted. There's a greatdeal to come before that!

Call the first witness, said the King; and the White Rabbit blew threeblasts on the trumpet, and called out, First witness!

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in onehand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. I beg pardon, yourMajesty, he began, for bringing these in: but I hadn't quite finishedmy tea when I was sent for.

You ought to have finished, said the King. When did you begin?

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into thecourt, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. Fourteenth of March, I think itwas, he said.

Fifteenth, said the March Hare.

Sixteenth, added the Dormouse.

Write that down, the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerlywrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, andreduced the answer to shillings and pence.

Take off your hat, the King said to the Hatter.

It isn't mine, said the Hatter.

Stolen! the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made amemorandum of the fact.

I keep them to sell, the Hatter added as an explanation; I've none ofmy own. I'm a hatter.

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter,who turned pale and fidgeted.

Give your evidence, said the King; and don't be nervous, or I'll haveyou executed on the spot.

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shiftingfrom one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and inhis confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of thebread-and-butter.

Just at this moment I felt a very curious sensation, which puzzledher a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning togrow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leavethe court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was aslong as there was room for her.

I wish you wouldn't squeeze so. said the Dormouse, who was sittingnext to her. I can hardly breathe.

I can't help it, said I very meekly: I'm growing.

You've no right to grow here, said the Dormouse.

Don't talk nonsense, said I more boldly: you know you're growingtoo.

Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace, said the Dormouse: not in thatridiculous fashion. And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to theother side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officersof the court, Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert! onwhich the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

Give your evidence, the King repeated angrily, or I'll have youexecuted, whether you're nervous or not.

I'm a poor man, your Majesty, the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,-and I hadn't begun my tea-not above a week or so-and what with thebread-and-butter getting so thin-and the twinkling of the tea-

The twinkling of the what? said the King.

It began with the tea, the Hatter replied.

Of course twinkling begins with a T! said the King sharply. Do youtake me for a dunce? Go on!

I'm a poor man, the Hatter went on, and most things twinkled afterthat-only the March Hare said-

I didn't! the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

You did! said the Hatter.

I deny it! said the March Hare.

He denies it, said the King: leave out that part.

Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said- the Hatter went on, lookinganxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse deniednothing, being fast asleep.

After that, continued the Hatter, I cut some more bread-and-butter-

But what did the Dormouse say? one of the jury asked.

That I can't remember, said the Hatter.

You MUST remember, remarked the King, or I'll have you executed.

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and wentdown on one knee. I'm a poor man, your Majesty, he began.

You're a very poor speaker, said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed bythe officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will justexplain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tiedup at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,head first, and then sat upon it.)

I'm glad I've seen that done, thought I. I've so often readin the newspapers, at the end of trials, There was some attemptsat applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of thecourt, and I never understood what it meant till now.

If that's all you know about it, you may stand down, continued theKing.

I can't go no lower, said the Hatter: I'm on the floor, as it is.

Then you may SIT down, the King replied.

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

Come, that finished the guinea-pigs! thought I. Now we shall geton better.

I'd rather finish my tea, said the Hatter, with an anxious look at theQueen, who was reading the list of singers.

You may go, said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,without even waiting to put his shoes on.

-and just take his head off outside, the Queen added to one of theofficers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could getto the door.

Call the next witness! said the King.

The next witness was the Duchess's cook. She carried the pepper-box inher hand, and I guessed who it was, even before she got into thecourt, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

Give your evidence, said the King.

Shan't, said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.

Well, if I must, I must, the King said, with a melancholy air, and,after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes werenearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, What are tarts made of?

Pepper, mostly, said the cook.

Treacle, said a sleepy voice behind her.

Collar that Dormouse, the Queen shrieked out. Behead that Dormouse!Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with hiswhiskers!

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouseturned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook haddisappeared.

Never mind! said the King, with an air of great relief. Call the nextwitness. And he added in an undertone to the Queen, Really, my dear,YOU must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my foreheadache!

I watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling verycurious to see what the next witness would be like, -for they haven'tgot much evidence YET, she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, whenthe White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, thename I!

Here! cried I, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment howlarge she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in sucha hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and therethey lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfishshe had accidentally upset the week before.

Oh, I BEG your pardon! she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, andbegan picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident ofthe goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of ideathat they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, orthey would die.

The trial cannot proceed, said the King in a very grave voice, untilall the jurymen are back in their proper places-ALL, he repeated withgreat emphasis, looking hard at I as he said do.

I looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had putthe Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving itstail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon gotit out again, and put it right; not that it signifies much, she saidto herself; I should think it would be QUITE as much use in the trialone way up as the other.

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of beingupset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back tothem, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of theaccident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to doanything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of thecourt.

What do you know about this business? the King said to I.

Nothing, said I.

Nothing WHATEVER? persisted the King.

Nothing whatever, said I.

That's very important, the King said, turning to the jury. They werejust beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbitinterrupted: UNimportant, your Majesty means, of course, he said in avery respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.

UNimportant, of course, I meant, the King hastily said, and went onto himself in an undertone,

important-unimportant-unimportant-important- as if he were trying which word sounded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down important, and some unimportant. I could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;'but it doesn't matter a bit, she thought to herself.

At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing inhis note-book, cackled out Silence! and read out from his book, RuleForty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.

Everybody looked at I.

I'M not a mile high, said I.

You are, said the King.

Nearly two miles high, added the Queen.

Well, I shan't go, at any rate, said I: besides, that's not aregular rule: you invented it just now.

It's the oldest rule in the book, said the King.

Then it ought to be Number One, said I.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. Consider yourverdict, he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty, said the WhiteRabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; this paper has just been pickedup.

What's in it? said the Queen.

I haven't opened it yet, said the White Rabbit, but it seems to be aletter, written by the prisoner to-to somebody.

It must have been that, said the King, unless it was written tonobody, which isn't usual, you know.

Who is it directed to? said one of the jurymen.

It isn't directed at all, said the White Rabbit; in fact, there'snothing written on the OUTSIDE. He unfolded the paper as he spoke, andadded It isn't a letter, after all: it's a set of verses.

Are they in the prisoner's handwriting? asked another of the jurymen.

No, they're not, said the White Rabbit, and that's the queerest thingabout it. (The jury all looked puzzled.)

He must have imitated somebody else's hand, said the King. (The juryall brightened up again.)

Please your Majesty, said the Knave, I didn't write it, and theycan't prove I did: there's no name signed at the end.

If you didn't sign it, said the King, that only makes the matterworse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed yourname like an honest man.

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first reallyclever thing the King had said that day.

That PROVES his guilt, said the Queen.

It proves nothing of the sort! said I. Why, you don't even knowwhat they're about!

Read them, said the King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. Where shall I begin, pleaseyour Majesty? he asked.

Begin at the beginning, the King said gravely, and go on till youcome to the end: then stop.

These were the verses the White Rabbit read:

That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet, said theKing, rubbing his hands; so now let the jury-

If any one of them can explain it, said I, (she had grown so largein the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interruptinghim,) I'll give him sixpence. _I_ don't believe there's an atom ofmeaning in it.

The jury all wrote down on their slates, SHE doesn't believe there's anatom of meaning in it, but none of them attempted to explain the paper.

If there's no meaning in it, said the King, that saves a world oftrouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any. And yet I don't know,he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at themwith one eye; I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. -SAIDI COULD NOT SWIM- you can't swim, can you? he added, turning to theKnave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. Do I look like it? he said. (Which hecertainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

All right, so far, said the King, and he went on muttering overthe verses to himself: WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE- that's the jury, ofcourse-I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO- why, that must be what hedid with the tarts, you know-

But, it goes on THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU, said I.

Why, there they are! said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tartson the table. Nothing can be clearer than THAT. Then again-BEFORE SHEHAD THIS FIT- you never had fits, my dear, I think? he said to theQueen.

Never! said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizardas she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on hisslate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastilybegan again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long asit lasted.)

Then the words don't FIT you, said the King, looking round the courtwith a smile. There was a dead silence.

It's a pun! the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed,Let the jury consider their verdict, the King said, for about thetwentieth time that day.

No, no! said the Queen. Sentence first-verdict afterwards.

Stuff and nonsense! said I loudly. The idea of having thesentence first!

Hold your tongue! said the Queen, turning purple.

I won't! said I.

Off with her head! the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobodymoved.

Who cares for you? said I, (she had grown to her full size by thistime.) You're nothing but a pack of cards!

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down uponher: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, andtried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with herhead in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some deadleaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

Wake up, I dear! said her sister; Why, what a long sleep you'vehad!

Oh, I've had such a curious dream! said I, and she told hersister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventuresof hers that you have just been reading about; and when she hadfinished, her sister kissed her, and said, It WAS a curious dream,dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's getting late. SoI got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,what a wonderful dream it had been.

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on herhand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little I and all herwonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, andthis was her dream:

First, she dreamed of little I herself, and once again the tinyhands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were lookingup into hers-she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see thatqueer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair thatWOULD always get into her eyes-and still as she listened, or seemed tolisten, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creaturesof her little sister's dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by-thefrightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool-shecould hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friendsshared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queenordering off her unfortunate guests to execution-once more the pig-babywas sneezing on the Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashedaround it-once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of theLizard's slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable MockTurtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself inWonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and allwould change to dull reality-the grass would be only rustling in thewind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds-the rattlingteacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen's shrillcries to the voice of the shepherd boy-and the sneeze of the baby, theshriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (sheknew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard-while the lowingof the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle'sheavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of herswould, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she wouldkeep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of herchildhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, andmake THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps evenwith the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel withall their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.

Midway upon the journey of our life
I found myself within a forest dark,
For the straightforward pathway had been lost.

Ah me! how hard a thing it is to say
What was this forest savage, rough, and stern,
Which in the very thought renews the fear.

So bitter is it, death is little more;
But of the good to treat, which there I found,
Speak will I of the other things I saw there.

I cannot well repeat how there I entered,
So full was I of slumber at the moment
In which I had abandoned the true way.

But after I had reached a mountain's foot,
At that point where the valley terminated,
Which had with consternation pierced my heart,

Upward I looked, and I beheld its shoulders,
Vested already with that planet's rays
Which leadeth others right by every road.

Then was the fear a little quieted
That in my heart's lake had endured throughout
The night, which I had passed so piteously.

And even as he, who, with distressful breath,
Forth issued from the sea upon the shore,
Turns to the water perilous and gazes;

So did my soul, that still was fleeing onward,
Turn itself back to re-behold the pass
Which never yet a living person left.

After my weary body I had rested,
The way resumed I on the desert slope,
So that the firm foot ever was the lower.

And lo! almost where the ascent began,
A panther light and swift exceedingly,
Which with a spotted skin was covered o'er!

And never moved she from before my face,
Nay, rather did impede so much my way,
That many times I to return had turned.

The time was the beginning of the morning,
And up the sun was mounting with those stars
That with him were, what time the Love Divine

At first in motion set those beauteous things;
So were to me occasion of good hope,
The variegated skin of that wild beast,

The hour of time, and the delicious season;
But not so much, that did not give me fear
A lion's aspect which appeared to me.

He seemed as if against me he were coming
With head uplifted, and with ravenous hunger,
So that it seemed the air was afraid of him;

And a she-wolf, that with all hungerings
Seemed to be laden in her meagreness,
And many folk has caused to live forlorn!

She brought upon me so much heaviness,
With the affright that from her aspect came,
That I the hope relinquished of the height.

And as he is who willingly acquires,
And the time comes that causes him to lose,
Who weeps in all his thoughts and is despondent,

E'en such made me that beast withouten peace,
Which, coming on against me by degrees
Thrust me back thither where the sun is silent.

While I was rushing downward to the lowland,
Before mine eyes did one present himself,
Who seemed from long-continued silence hoarse.

When I beheld him in the desert vast,
Have pity on me, unto him I cried,
Whiche'er thou art, or shade or real man!

He answered me: Not man; man once I was,
And both my parents were of Lombardy,
And Mantuans by country both of them.

'Sub Julio' was I born, though it was late,
And lived at Rome under the good Augustus,
During the time of false and lying gods.

A poet was I, and I sang that just
Son of Anchises, who came forth from Troy,
After that Ilion the superb was burned.

But thou, why goest thou back to such annoyance?
Why climb'st thou not the Mount Delectable,
Which is the source and cause of every joy?

Now, art thou that Virgilius and that fountain
Which spreads abroad so wide a river of speech?
I made response to him with bashful forehead.

O, of the other poets honour and light,
Avail me the long study and great love
That have impelled me to explore thy volume!

Thou art my master, and my author thou,
Thou art alone the one from whom I took
The beautiful style that has done honour to me.

Behold the beast, for which I have turned back;
Do thou protect me from her, famous Sage,
For she doth make my veins and pulses tremble.

Thee it behoves to take another road,
Responded he, when he beheld me weeping,
If from this savage place thou wouldst escape;

Because this beast, at which thou criest out,
Suffers not any one to pass her way,
But so doth harass him, that she destroys him;

And has a nature so malign and ruthless,
That never doth she glut her greedy will,
And after food is hungrier than before.

Many the animals with whom she weds,
And more they shall be still, until the Greyhound
Comes, who shall make her perish in her pain.

He shall not feed on either earth or pelf,
But upon wisdom, and on love and virtue;
'Twixt Feltro and Feltro shall his nation be;

Of that low Italy shall he be the saviour,
On whose account the maid Camilla died,
Euryalus, Turnus, Nisus, of their wounds;

Through every city shall he hunt her down,
Until he shall have driven her back to Hell,
There from whence envy first did let her loose.

Therefore I think and judge it for thy best
Thou follow me, and I will be thy guide,
And lead thee hence through the eternal place,

Where thou shalt hear the desperate lamentations,
Shalt see the ancient spirits disconsolate,
Who cry out each one for the second death;

And thou shalt see those who contented are
Within the fire, because they hope to come,
Whene'er it may be, to the blessed people;

To whom, then, if thou wishest to ascend,
A soul shall be for that than I more worthy;
With her at my departure I will leave thee;

Because that Emperor, who reigns above,
In that I was rebellious to his law,
Wills that through me none come into his city.

He governs everywhere, and there he reigns;
There is his city and his lofty throne;
O happy he whom thereto he elects!

And I to him: Poet, I thee entreat,
By that same God whom thou didst never know,
So that I may escape this woe and worse,

Thou wouldst conduct me there where thou hast said,
That I may see the portal of Saint Peter,
And those thou makest so disconsolate.

Then he moved on, and I behind him followed.
Day was departing, and the embrowned air
Released the animals that are on earth
From their fatigues; and I the only one

Made myself ready to sustain the war,
Both of the way and likewise of the woe,
Which memory that errs not shall retrace.

O Muses, O high genius, now assist me!
O memory, that didst write down what I saw,
Here thy nobility shall be manifest!

And I began: Poet, who guidest me,
Regard my manhood, if it be sufficient,
Ere to the arduous pass thou dost confide me.

Thou sayest, that of Silvius the parent,
While yet corruptible, unto the world
Immortal went, and was there bodily.

But if the adversary of all evil
Was courteous, thinking of the high effect
That issue would from him, and who, and what,

To men of intellect unmeet it seems not;
For he was of great Rome, and of her empire
In the empyreal heaven as father chosen;

The which and what, wishing to speak the truth,
Were stablished as the holy place, wherein
Sits the successor of the greatest Peter.

Upon this journey, whence thou givest him vaunt,
Things did he hear, which the occasion were
Both of his victory and the papal mantle.

Thither went afterwards the Chosen Vessel,
To bring back comfort thence unto that Faith,
Which of salvation's way is the beginning.

But I, why thither come, or who concedes it?
I not Aeneas am, I am not Paul,
Nor I, nor others, think me worthy of it.

Therefore, if I resign myself to come,
I fear the coming may be ill-advised;
Thou'rt wise, and knowest better than I speak.

And as he is, who unwills what he willed,
And by new thoughts doth his intention change,
So that from his design he quite withdraws,

Such I became, upon that dark hillside,
Because, in thinking, I consumed the emprise,
Which was so very prompt in the beginning.

If I have well thy language understood,
Replied that shade of the Magnanimous,
Thy soul attainted is with cowardice,

Which many times a man encumbers so,
It turns him back from honoured enterprise,
As false sight doth a beast, when he is shy.

That thou mayst free thee from this apprehension,
I'll tell thee why I came, and what I heard
At the first moment when I grieved for thee.

Among those was I who are in suspense,
And a fair, saintly Lady called to me
In such wise, I besought her to command me.

Her eyes where shining brighter than the Star;
And she began to say, gentle and low,
With voice angelical, in her own language:

'O spirit courteous of Mantua,
Of whom the fame still in the world endures,
And shall endure, long-lasting as the world;

A friend of mine, and not the friend of fortune,
Upon the desert slope is so impeded
Upon his way, that he has turned through terror,

And may, I fear, already be so lost,
That I too late have risen to his succour,
From that which I have heard of him in Heaven.

Bestir thee now, and with thy speech ornate,
And with what needful is for his release,
Assist him so, that I may be consoled.

Beatrice am I, who do bid thee go;
I come from there, where I would fain return;
Love moved me, which compelleth me to speak.

When I shall be in presence of my Lord,
Full often will I praise thee unto him.'
Then paused she, and thereafter I began:

'O Lady of virtue, thou alone through whom
The human race exceedeth all contained
Within the heaven that has the lesser circles,

So grateful unto me is thy commandment,
To obey, if 'twere already done, were late;
No farther need'st thou ope to me thy wish.

But the cause tell me why thou dost not shun
The here descending down into this centre,
From the vast place thou burnest to return to.'

'Since thou wouldst fain so inwardly discern,
Briefly will I relate,' she answered me,
'Why I am not afraid to enter here.

Of those things only should one be afraid
Which have the power of doing others harm;
Of the rest, no; because they are not fearful.

God in his mercy such created me
That misery of yours attains me not,
Nor any flame assails me of this burning.

A gentle Lady is in Heaven, who grieves
At this impediment, to which I send thee,
So that stern judgment there above is broken.

In her entreaty she besought Lucia,
And said, Thy faithful one now stands in need
Of thee, and unto thee I recommend him.

Lucia, foe of all that cruel is,
Hastened away, and came unto the place
Where I was sitting with the ancient Rachel.

Beatrice said she, the true praise of God,
Why succourest thou not him, who loved thee so,
For thee he issued from the vulgar herd?

Dost thou not hear the pity of his plaint?
Dost thou not see the death that combats him
Beside that flood, where ocean has no vaunt?

Never were persons in the world so swift
To work their weal and to escape their woe,
As I, after such words as these were uttered,

Came hither downward from my blessed seat,
Confiding in thy dignified discourse,
Which honours thee, and those who've listened to it.'

After she thus had spoken unto me,
Weeping, her shining eyes she turned away;
Whereby she made me swifter in my coming;

And unto thee I came, as she desired;
I have delivered thee from that wild beast,
Which barred the beautiful mountain's short ascent.

What is it, then?Why, why dost thou delay?
Why is such baseness bedded in thy heart?
Daring and hardihood why hast thou not,

Seeing that three such Ladies benedight
Are caring for thee in the court of Heaven,
And so much good my speech doth promise thee?

Even as the flowerets, by nocturnal chill,
Bowed down and closed, when the sun whitens them,
Uplift themselves all open on their stems;

Such I became with my exhausted strength,
And such good courage to my heart there coursed,
That I began, like an intrepid person:

O she compassionate, who succoured me,
And courteous thou, who hast obeyed so soon
The words of truth which she addressed to thee!

Thou hast my heart so with desire disposed
To the adventure, with these words of thine,
That to my first intent I have returned.

Now go, for one sole will is in us both,
Thou Leader, and thou Lord, and Master thou.
Thus said I to him; and when he had moved,

I entered on the deep and savage way.
Through me the way is to the city dolent;
Through me the way is to eternal dole;
Through me the way among the people lost.

Justice incited my sublime Creator;
Created me divine Omnipotence,
The highest Wisdom and the primal Love.

Before me there were no created things,
Only eterne, and I eternal last.
All hope abandon, ye who enter in!

These words in sombre colour I beheld
Written upon the summit of a gate;
Whence I: Their sense is, Master, hard to me!

And he to me, as one experienced:
Here all suspicion needs must be abandoned,
All cowardice must needs be here extinct.

We to the place have come, where I have told thee
Thou shalt behold the people dolorous
Who have foregone the good of intellect.

And after he had laid his hand on mine
With joyful mien, whence I was comforted,
He led me in among the secret things.

There sighs, complaints, and ululations loud
Resounded through the air without a star,
Whence I, at the beginning, wept thereat.

Languages diverse, horrible dialects,
Accents of anger, words of agony,
And voices high and hoarse, with sound of hands,

Made up a tumult that goes whirling on
For ever in that air for ever black,
Even as the sand doth, when the whirlwind breathes.

And I, who had my head with horror bound,
Said: Master, what is this which now I hear?
What folk is this, which seems by pain so vanquished?

And he to me: This miserable mode
Maintain the melancholy souls of those
Who lived withouten infamy or praise.

Commingled are they with that caitiff choir
Of Angels, who have not rebellious been,
Nor faithful were to God, but were for self.

The heavens expelled them, not to be less fair;
Nor them the nethermore abyss receives,
For glory none the damned would have from them.

And I: O Master, what so grievous is
To these, that maketh them lament so sore?
He answered: I will tell thee very briefly.

These have no longer any hope of death;
And this blind life of theirs is so debased,
They envious are of every other fate.

No fame of them the world permits to be;
Misericord and Justice both disdain them.
Let us not speak of them, but look, and pass.

And I, who looked again, beheld a banner,
Which, whirling round, ran on so rapidly,
That of all pause it seemed to me indignant;

And after it there came so long a train
Of people, that I ne'er would have believed
That ever Death so many had undone.

When some among them I had recognised,
I looked, and I beheld the shade of him
Who made through cowardice the great refusal.

Forthwith I comprehended, and was certain,
That this the sect was of the caitiff wretches
Hateful to God and to his enemies.

These miscreants, who never were alive,
Were naked, and were stung exceedingly
By gadflies and by hornets that were there.

These did their faces irrigate with blood,
Which, with their tears commingled, at their feet
By the disgusting worms was gathered up.

And when to gazing farther I betook me.
People I saw on a great river's bank;
Whence said I: Master, now vouchsafe to me,

That I may know who these are, and what law
Makes them appear so ready to pass over,
As I discern athwart the dusky light.

And he to me: These things shall all be known
To thee, as soon as we our footsteps stay
Upon the dismal shore of Acheron.

Then with mine eyes ashamed and downward cast,
Fearing my words might irksome be to him,
From speech refrained I till we reached the river.

And lo! towards us coming in a boat
An old man, hoary with the hair of eld,
Crying: Woe unto you, ye souls depraved!

Hope nevermore to look upon the heavens;
I come to lead you to the other shore,
To the eternal shades in heat and frost.

And thou, that yonder standest, living soul,
Withdraw thee from these people, who are dead!
But when he saw that I did not withdraw,

He said: By other ways, by other ports
Thou to the shore shalt come, not here, for passage;
A lighter vessel needs must carry thee.

And unto him the Guide: Vex thee not, Charon;
It is so willed there where is power to do
That which is willed; and farther question not.

Thereat were quieted the fleecy cheeks
Of him the ferryman of the livid fen,
Who round about his eyes had wheels of flame.

But all those souls who weary were and naked
Their colour changed and gnashed their teeth together,
As soon as they had heard those cruel words.

God they blasphemed and their progenitors,
The human race, the place, the time, the seed
Of their engendering and of their birth!

Thereafter all together they drew back,
Bitterly weeping, to the accursed shore,
Which waiteth every man who fears not God.

Charon the demon, with the eyes of glede,
Beckoning to them, collects them all together,
Beats with his oar whoever lags behind.

As in the autumn-time the leaves fall off,
First one and then another, till the branch
Unto the earth surrenders all its spoils;

In similar wise the evil seed of Adam
Throw themselves from that margin one by one,
At signals, as a bird unto its lure.

So they depart across the dusky wave,
And ere upon the other side they land,
Again on this side a new troop assembles.

My son, the courteous Master said to me,
All those who perish in the wrath of God
Here meet together out of every land;

And ready are they to pass o'er the river,
Because celestial Justice spurs them on,
So that their fear is turned into desire.

This way there never passes a good soul;
And hence if Charon doth complain of thee,
Well mayst thou know now what his speech imports.

This being finished, all the dusk champaign
Trembled so violently, that of that terror
The recollection bathes me still with sweat.

The land of tears gave forth a blast of wind,
And fulminated a vermilion light,
Which overmastered in me every sense,

And as a man whom sleep hath seized I fell.
Broke the deep lethargy within my head
A heavy thunder, so that I upstarted,
Like to a person who by force is wakened;

And round about I moved my rested eyes,
Uprisen erect, and steadfastly I gazed,
To recognise the place wherein I was.

True is it, that upon the verge I found me
Of the abysmal valley dolorous,
That gathers thunder of infinite ululations.

Obscure, profound it was, and nebulous,
So that by fixing on its depths my sight
Nothing whatever I discerned therein.

Let us descend now into the blind world,
Began the Poet, pallid utterly;
I will be first, and thou shalt second be.

And I, who of his colour was aware,
Said: How shall I come, if thou art afraid,
Who'rt wont to be a comfort to my fears?

And he to me: The anguish of the people
Who are below here in my face depicts
That pity which for terror thou hast taken.

Let us go on, for the long way impels us.
Thus he went in, and thus he made me enter
The foremost circle that surrounds the abyss.

There, as it seemed to me from listening,
Were lamentations none, but only sighs,
That tremble made the everlasting air.

And this arose from sorrow without torment,
Which the crowds had, that many were and great,
Of infants and of women and of men.

To me the Master good: Thou dost not ask
What spirits these, which thou beholdest, are?
Now will I have thee know, ere thou go farther,

That they sinned not; and if they merit had,
'Tis not enough, because they had not baptism
Which is the portal of the Faith thou holdest;

And if they were before Christianity,
In the right manner they adored not God;
And among such as these am I myself.

For such defects, and not for other guilt,
Lost are we and are only so far punished,
That without hope we live on in desire.

Great grief seized on my heart when this I heard,
Because some people of much worthiness
I knew, who in that Limbo were suspended.

Tell me, my Master, tell me, thou my Lord,
Began I, with desire of being certain
Of that Faith which o'ercometh every error,

Came any one by his own merit hence,
Or by another's, who was blessed thereafter?
And he, who understood my covert speech,

Replied: I was a novice in this state,
When I saw hither come a Mighty One,
With sign of victory incoronate.

Hence he drew forth the shade of the First Parent,
And that of his son Abel, and of Noah,
Of Moses the lawgiver, and the obedient

Abraham, patriarch, and David, king,
Israel with his father and his children,
And Rachel, for whose sake he did so much,

And others many, and he made them blessed;
And thou must know, that earlier than these
Never were any human spirits saved.

We ceased not to advance because he spake,
But still were passing onward through the forest,
The forest, say I, of thick-crowded ghosts.

Not very far as yet our way had gone
This side the summit, when I saw a fire
That overcame a hemisphere of darkness.

We were a little distant from it still,
But not so far that I in part discerned not
That honourable people held that place.

O thou who honourest every art and science,
Who may these be, which such great honour have,
That from the fashion of the rest it parts them?

And he to me: The honourable name,
That sounds of them above there in thy life,
Wins grace in Heaven, that so advances them.

In the mean time a voice was heard by me:
All honour be to the pre-eminent Poet;
His shade returns again, that was departed.

After the voice had ceased and quiet was,
Four mighty shades I saw approaching us;
Semblance had they nor sorrowful nor glad.

To say to me began my gracious Master:
Him with that falchion in his hand behold,
Who comes before the three, even as their lord.

That one is Homer, Poet sovereign;
He who comes next is Horace, the satirist;
The third is Ovid, and the last is Lucan.

Because to each of these with me applies
The name that solitary voice proclaimed,
They do me honour, and in that do well.

Thus I beheld assemble the fair school
Of that lord of the song pre-eminent,
Who o'er the others like an eagle soars.

When they together had discoursed somewhat,
They turned to me with signs of salutation,
And on beholding this, my Master smiled;

And more of honour still, much more, they did me,
In that they made me one of their own band;
So that the sixth was I, 'mid so much wit.

Thus we went on as far as to the light,
Things saying 'tis becoming to keep silent,
As was the saying of them where I was.

We came unto a noble castle's foot,
Seven times encompassed with lofty walls,
Defended round by a fair rivulet;

This we passed over even as firm ground;
Through portals seven I entered with these Sages;
We came into a meadow of fresh verdure.

People were there with solemn eyes and slow,
Of great authority in their countenance;
They spake but seldom, and with gentle voices.

Thus we withdrew ourselves upon one side
Into an opening luminous and lofty,
So that they all of them were visible.

There opposite, upon the green enamel,
Were pointed out to me the mighty spirits,
Whom to have seen I feel myself exalted.

I saw Electra with companions many,
'Mongst whom I knew both Hector and Aeneas,
Caesar in armour with gerfalcon eyes;

I saw Camilla and Penthesilea
On the other side, and saw the King Latinus,
Who with Lavinia his daughter sat;

I saw that Brutus who drove Tarquin forth,
Lucretia, Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia,
And saw alone, apart, the Saladin.

When I had lifted up my brows a little,
The Master I beheld of those who know,
Sit with his philosophic family.

All gaze upon him, and all do him honour.
There I beheld both Socrates and Plato,
Who nearer him before the others stand;

Democritus, who puts the world on chance,
Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales,
Zeno, Empedocles, and Heraclitus;

Of qualities I saw the good collector,
Hight Dioscorides; and Orpheus saw I,
Tully and Livy, and moral Seneca,

Euclid, geometrician, and Ptolemy,
Galen, Hippocrates, and Avicenna,
Averroes, who the great Comment made.

I cannot all of them pourtray in full,
Because so drives me onward the long theme,
That many times the word comes short of fact.

The sixfold company in two divides;
Another way my sapient Guide conducts me
Forth from the quiet to the air that trembles;

And to a place I come where nothing shines.
Thus I descended out of the first circle
Down to the second, that less space begirds,
And so much greater dole, that goads to wailing.

There standeth Minos horribly, and snarls;
Examines the transgressions at the entrance;
Judges, and sends according as he girds him.

I say, that when the spirit evil-born
Cometh before him, wholly it confesses;
And this discriminator of transgressions

Seeth what place in Hell is meet for it;
Girds himself with his tail as many times
As grades he wishes it should be thrust down.

Always before him many of them stand;
They go by turns each one unto the judgment;
They speak, and hear, and then are downward hurled.

O thou, that to this dolorous hostelry
Comest, said Minos to me, when he saw me,
Leaving the practice of so great an office,

Look how thou enterest, and in whom thou trustest;
Let not the portal's amplitude deceive thee.
And unto him my Guide: Why criest thou too?

Do not impede his journey fate-ordained;
It is so willed there where is power to do
That which is willed; and ask no further question.

And now begin the dolesome notes to grow
Audible unto me; now am I come
There where much lamentation strikes upon me.

I came into a place mute of all light,
Which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,
If by opposing winds 't is combated.

The infernal hurricane that never rests
Hurtles the spirits onward in its rapine;
Whirling them round, and smiting, it molests them.

When they arrive before the precipice,
There are the shrieks, the plaints, and the laments,
There they blaspheme the puissance divine.

I understood that unto such a torment
The carnal malefactors were condemned,
Who reason subjugate to appetite.

And as the wings of starlings bear them on
In the cold season in large band and full,
So doth that blast the spirits maledict;

It hither, thither, downward, upward, drives them;
No hope doth comfort them for evermore,
Not of repose, but even of lesser pain.

And as the cranes go chanting forth their lays,
Making in air a long line of themselves,
So saw I coming, uttering lamentations,

Shadows borne onward by the aforesaid stress.
Whereupon said I: Master, who are those
People, whom the black air so castigates?

The first of those, of whom intelligence
Thou fain wouldst have, then said he unto me,
The empress was of many languages.

To sensual vices she was so abandoned,
That lustful she made licit in her law,
To remove the blame to which she had been led.

She is Semiramis, of whom we read
That she succeeded Ninus, and was his spouse;
She held the land which now the Sultan rules.

The next is she who killed herself for love,
And broke faith with the ashes of Sichaeus;
Then Cleopatra the voluptuous.

Helen I saw, for whom so many ruthless
Seasons revolved; and saw the great Achilles,
Who at the last hour combated with Love.

Paris I saw, Tristan; and more than a thousand
Shades did he name and point out with his finger,
Whom Love had separated from our life.

After that I had listened to my Teacher,
Naming the dames of eld and cavaliers,
Pity prevailed, and I was nigh bewildered.

And I began: O Poet, willingly
Speak would I to those two, who go together,
And seem upon the wind to be so light.

And, he to me: Thou'lt mark, when they shall be
Nearer to us; and then do thou implore them
By love which leadeth them, and they will come.

Soon as the wind in our direction sways them,
My voice uplift I: O ye weary souls!
Come speak to us, if no one interdicts it.

As turtle-doves, called onward by desire,
With open and steady wings to the sweet nest
Fly through the air by their volition borne,

So came they from the band where Dido is,
Approaching us athwart the air malign,
So strong was the affectionate appeal.

O living creature gracious and benignant,
Who visiting goest through the purple air
Us, who have stained the world incarnadine,

If were the King of the Universe our friend,
We would pray unto him to give thee peace,
Since thou hast pity on our woe perverse.

Of what it pleases thee to hear and speak,
That will we hear, and we will speak to you,
While silent is the wind, as it is now.

Sitteth the city, wherein I was born,
Upon the sea-shore where the Po descends
To rest in peace with all his retinue.

Love, that on gentle heart doth swiftly seize,
Seized this man for the person beautiful
That was ta'en from me, and still the mode offends me.

Love, that exempts no one beloved from loving,
Seized me with pleasure of this man so strongly,
That, as thou seest, it doth not yet desert me;

Love has conducted us unto one death;
Caina waiteth him who quenched our life!
These words were borne along from them to us.

As soon as I had heard those souls tormented,
I bowed my face, and so long held it down
Until the Poet said to me: What thinkest?

When I made answer, I began: Alas!
How many pleasant thoughts, how much desire,
Conducted these unto the dolorous pass!

Then unto them I turned me, and I spake,
And I began: Thine agonies, Francesca,
Sad and compassionate to weeping make me.

But tell me, at the time of those sweet sighs,
By what and in what manner Love conceded,
That you should know your dubious desires?

And she to me: There is no greater sorrow
Than to be mindful of the happy time
In misery, and that thy Teacher knows.

But, if to recognise the earliest root
Of love in us thou hast so great desire,
I will do even as he who weeps and speaks.

One day we reading were for our delight
Of Launcelot, how Love did him enthral.
Alone we were and without any fear.

Full many a time our eyes together drew
That reading, and drove the colour from our faces;
But one point only was it that o'ercame us.

When as we read of the much-longed-for smile
Being by such a noble lover kissed,
This one, who ne'er from me shall be divided,

Kissed me upon the mouth all palpitating.
Galeotto was the book and he who wrote it.
That day no farther did we read therein.

And all the while one spirit uttered this,
The other one did weep so, that, for pity,
I swooned away as if I had been dying,

And fell, even as a dead body falls.
At the return of consciousness, that closed
Before the pity of those two relations,
Which utterly with sadness had confused me,

New torments I behold, and new tormented
Around me, whichsoever way I move,
And whichsoever way I turn, and gaze.

In the third circle am I of the rain
Eternal, maledict, and cold, and heavy;
Its law and quality are never new.

Huge hail, and water sombre-hued, and snow,
Athwart the tenebrous air pour down amain;
Noisome the earth is, that receiveth this.

Cerberus, monster cruel and uncouth,
With his three gullets like a dog is barking
Over the people that are there submerged.

Red eyes he has, and unctuous beard and black,
And belly large, and armed with claws his hands;
He rends the spirits, flays, and quarters them.

Howl the rain maketh them like unto dogs;
One side they make a shelter for the other;
Oft turn themselves the wretched reprobates.

When Cerberus perceived us, the great worm!
His mouths he opened, and displayed his tusks;
Not a limb had he that was motionless.

And my Conductor, with his spans extended,
Took of the earth, and with his fists well filled,
He threw it into those rapacious gullets.

Such as that dog is, who by barking craves,
And quiet grows soon as his food he gnaws,
For to devour it he but thinks and struggles,

The like became those muzzles filth-begrimed
Of Cerberus the demon, who so thunders
Over the souls that they would fain be deaf.

We passed across the shadows, which subdues
The heavy rain-storm, and we placed our feet
Upon their vanity that person seems.

They all were lying prone upon the earth,
Excepting one, who sat upright as soon
As he beheld us passing on before him.

O thou that art conducted through this Hell,
He said to me, recall me, if thou canst;
Thyself wast made before I was unmade.

And I to him: The anguish which thou hast
Perhaps doth draw thee out of my remembrance,
So that it seems not I have ever seen thee.

But tell me who thou art, that in so doleful
A place art put, and in such punishment,
If some are greater, none is so displeasing.

And he to me: Thy city, which is full
Of envy so that now the sack runs over,
Held me within it in the life serene.

You citizens were wont to call me Ciacco;
For the pernicious sin of gluttony
I, as thou seest, am battered by this rain.

And I, sad soul, am not the only one,
For all these suffer the like penalty
For the like sin; and word no more spake he.

I answered him: Ciacco, thy wretchedness
Weighs on me so that it to weep invites me;
But tell me, if thou knowest, to what shall come

The citizens of the divided city;
If any there be just; and the occasion
Tell me why so much discord has assailed it.

And he to me: They, after long contention,
Will come to bloodshed; and the rustic party
Will drive the other out with much offence.

Then afterwards behoves it this one fall
Within three suns, and rise again the other
By force of him who now is on the coast.

High will it hold its forehead a long while,
Keeping the other under heavy burdens,
Howe'er it weeps thereat and is indignant.

The just are two, and are not understood there;
Envy and Arrogance and Avarice
Are the three sparks that have all hearts enkindled.

Here ended he his tearful utterance;
And I to him: I wish thee still to teach me,
And make a gift to me of further speech.

Farinata and Tegghiaio, once so worthy,
Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca,
And others who on good deeds set their thoughts,

Say where they are, and cause that I may know them;
For great desire constraineth me to learn
If Heaven doth sweeten them, or Hell envenom.

And he: They are among the blacker souls;
A different sin downweighs them to the bottom;
If thou so far descendest, thou canst see them.

But when thou art again in the sweet world,
I pray thee to the mind of others bring me;
No more I tell thee and no more I answer.

Then his straightforward eyes he turned askance,
Eyed me a little, and then bowed his head;
He fell therewith prone like the other blind.

And the Guide said to me: He wakes no more
This side the sound of the angelic trumpet;
When shall approach the hostile Potentate,

Each one shall find again his dismal tomb,
Shall reassume his flesh and his own figure,
Shall hear what through eternity re-echoes.

So we passed onward o'er the filthy mixture
Of shadows and of rain with footsteps slow,
Touching a little on the future life.

Wherefore I said: Master, these torments here,
Will they increase after the mighty sentence,
Or lesser be, or will they be as burning?

And he to me: Return unto thy science,
Which wills, that as the thing more perfect is,
The more it feels of pleasure and of pain.

Albeit that this people maledict
To true perfection never can attain,
Hereafter more than now they look to be.

Round in a circle by that road we went,
Speaking much more, which I do not repeat;
We came unto the point where the descent is;

There we found Plutus the great enemy.
Pape Satan, Pape Satan, Aleppe!
Thus Plutus with his clucking voice began;
And that benignant Sage, who all things knew,

Said, to encourage me: Let not thy fear
Harm thee; for any power that he may have
Shall not prevent thy going down this crag.

Then he turned round unto that bloated lip,
And said: Be silent, thou accursed wolf;
Consume within thyself with thine own rage.

Not causeless is this journey to the abyss;
Thus is it willed on high, where Michael wrought
Vengeance upon the proud adultery.

Even as the sails inflated by the wind
Involved together fall when snaps the mast,
So fell the cruel monster to the earth.

Thus we descended into the fourth chasm,
Gaining still farther on the dolesome shore
Which all the woe of the universe insacks.

Justice of God, ah! who heaps up so many
New toils and sufferings as I beheld?
And why doth our transgression waste us so?

As doth the billow there upon Charybdis,
That breaks itself on that which it encounters,
So here the folk must dance their roundelay.

Here saw I people, more than elsewhere, many,
On one side and the other, with great howls,
Rolling weights forward by main force of chest.

They clashed together, and then at that point
Each one turned backward, rolling retrograde,
Crying, Why keepest? and, Why squanderest thou?

Thus they returned along the lurid circle
On either hand unto the opposite point,
Shouting their shameful metre evermore.

Then each, when he arrived there, wheeled about
Through his half-circle to another joust;
And I, who had my heart pierced as it were,

Exclaimed: My Master, now declare to me
What people these are, and if all were clerks,
These shaven crowns upon the left of us.

And he to me: All of them were asquint
In intellect in the first life, so much
That there with measure they no spending made.

Clearly enough their voices bark it forth,
Whene'er they reach the two points of the circle,
Where sunders them the opposite defect.

Clerks those were who no hairy covering
Have on the head, and Popes and Cardinals,
In whom doth Avarice practise its excess.

And I: My Master, among such as these
I ought forsooth to recognise some few,
Who were infected with these maladies.

And he to me: Vain thought thou entertainest;
The undiscerning life which made them sordid
Now makes them unto all discernment dim.

Forever shall they come to these two buttings;
These from the sepulchre shall rise again
With the fist closed, and these with tresses shorn.

Ill giving and ill keeping the fair world
Have ta'en from them, and placed them in this scuffle;
Whate'er it be, no words adorn I for it.

Now canst thou, Son, behold the transient farce
Of goods that are committed unto Fortune,
For which the human race each other buffet;

For all the gold that is beneath the moon,
Or ever has been, of these weary souls
Could never make a single one repose.

Master, I said to him, now tell me also
What is this Fortune which thou speakest of,
That has the world's goods so within its clutches?

And he to me: O creatures imbecile,
What ignorance is this which doth beset you?
Now will I have thee learn my judgment of her.

He whose omniscience everything transcends
The heavens created, and gave who should guide them,
That every part to every part may shine,

Distributing the light in equal measure;
He in like manner to the mundane splendours
Ordained a general ministress and guide,

That she might change at times the empty treasures
From race to race, from one blood to another,
Beyond resistance of all human wisdom.

Therefore one people triumphs, and another
Languishes, in pursuance of her judgment,
Which hidden is, as in the grass a serpent.

Your knowledge has no counterstand against her;
She makes provision, judges, and pursues
Her governance, as theirs the other gods.

Her permutations have not any truce;
Necessity makes her precipitate,
So often cometh who his turn obtains.

And this is she who is so crucified
Even by those who ought to give her praise,
Giving her blame amiss, and bad repute.

But she is blissful, and she hears it not;
Among the other primal creatures gladsome
She turns her sphere, and blissful she rejoices.

Let us descend now unto greater woe;
Already sinks each star that was ascending
When I set out, and loitering is forbidden.

We crossed the circle to the other bank,
Near to a fount that boils, and pours itself
Along a gully that runs out of it.

The water was more sombre far than perse;
And we, in company with the dusky waves,
Made entrance downward by a path uncouth.

A marsh it makes, which has the name of Styx,
This tristful brooklet, when it has descended
Down to the foot of the malign gray shores.

And I, who stood intent upon beholding,
Saw people mud-besprent in that lagoon,
All of them naked and with angry look.

They smote each other not alone with hands,
But with the head and with the breast and feet,
Tearing each other piecemeal with their teeth.

Said the good Master: Son, thou now beholdest
The souls of those whom anger overcame;
And likewise I would have thee know for certain

Beneath the water people are who sigh
And make this water bubble at the surface,
As the eye tells thee wheresoe'er it turns.

Fixed in the mire they say, 'We sullen were
In the sweet air, which by the sun is gladdened,
Bearing within ourselves the sluggish reek;

Now we are sullen in this sable mire.'
This hymn do they keep gurgling in their throats,
For with unbroken words they cannot say it.

Thus we went circling round the filthy fen
A great arc 'twixt the dry bank and the swamp,
With eyes turned unto those who gorge the mire;

Unto the foot of a tower we came at last.
I say, continuing, that long before
We to the foot of that high tower had come,
Our eyes went upward to the summit of it,

By reason of two flamelets we saw placed there,
And from afar another answer them,
So far, that hardly could the eye attain it.

And, to the sea of all discernment turned,
I said: What sayeth this, and what respondeth
That other fire? and who are they that made it?

And he to me: Across the turbid waves
What is expected thou canst now discern,
If reek of the morass conceal it not.

Cord never shot an arrow from itself
That sped away athwart the air so swift,
As I beheld a very little boat

Come o'er the water tow'rds us at that moment,
Under the guidance of a single pilot,
Who shouted, Now art thou arrived, fell soul?

Phlegyas, Phlegyas, thou criest out in vain
For this once, said my Lord; thou shalt not have us
Longer than in the passing of the slough.

As he who listens to some great deceit
That has been done to him, and then resents it,
Such became Phlegyas, in his gathered wrath.

My Guide descended down into the boat,
And then he made me enter after him,
And only when I entered seemed it laden.

Soon as the Guide and I were in the boat,
The antique prow goes on its way, dividing
More of the water than 'tis wont with others.

While we were running through the dead canal,
Uprose in front of me one full of mire,
And said, Who 'rt thou that comest ere the hour?

And I to him: Although I come, I stay not;
But who art thou that hast become so squalid?
Thou seest that I am one who weeps, he answered.

And I to him: With weeping and with wailing,
Thou spirit maledict, do thou remain;
For thee I know, though thou art all defiled.

Then stretched he both his hands unto the boat;
Whereat my wary Master thrust him back,
Saying, Away there with the other dogs!

Thereafter with his arms he clasped my neck;
He kissed my face, and said: Disdainful soul,
Blessed be she who bore thee in her bosom.

That was an arrogant person in the world;
Goodness is none, that decks his memory;
So likewise here his shade is furious.

How many are esteemed great kings up there,
Who here shall be like unto swine in mire,
Leaving behind them horrible dispraises!

And I: My Master, much should I be pleased,
If I could see him soused into this broth,
Before we issue forth out of the lake.

And he to me: Ere unto thee the shore
Reveal itself, thou shalt be satisfied;
Such a desire 'tis meet thou shouldst enjoy.

A little after that, I saw such havoc
Made of him by the people of the mire,
That still I praise and thank my God for it.

They all were shouting, At Philippo Argenti!
And that exasperate spirit Florentine
Turned round upon himself with his own teeth.

We left him there, and more of him I tell not;
But on mine ears there smote a lamentation,
Whence forward I intent unbar mine eyes.

And the good Master said: Even now, my Son,
The city draweth near whose name is Dis,
With the grave citizens, with the great throng.

And I: Its mosques already, Master, clearly
Within there in the valley I discern
Vermilion, as if issuing from the fire

They were.And he to me: The fire eternal
That kindles them within makes them look red,
As thou beholdest in this nether Hell.

Then we arrived within the moats profound,
That circumvallate that disconsolate city;
The walls appeared to me to be of iron.

Not without making first a circuit wide,
We came unto a place where loud the pilot
Cried out to us, Debark, here is the entrance.

More than a thousand at the gates I saw
Out of the Heavens rained down, who angrily
Were saying, Who is this that without death

Goes through the kingdom of the people dead?
And my sagacious Master made a sign
Of wishing secretly to speak with them.

A little then they quelled their great disdain,
And said: Come thou alone, and he begone
Who has so boldly entered these dominions.

Let him return alone by his mad road;
Try, if he can; for thou shalt here remain,
Who hast escorted him through such dark regions.

Think, Reader, if I was discomforted
At utterance of the accursed words;
For never to return here I believed.

O my dear Guide, who more than seven times
Hast rendered me security, and drawn me
From imminent peril that before me stood,

Do not desert me, said I, thus undone;
And if the going farther be denied us,
Let us retrace our steps together swiftly.

And that Lord, who had led me thitherward,
Said unto me: Fear not; because our passage
None can take from us, it by Such is given.

But here await me, and thy weary spirit
Comfort and nourish with a better hope;
For in this nether world I will not leave thee.

So onward goes and there abandons me
My Father sweet, and I remain in doubt,
For No and Yes within my head contend.

I could not hear what he proposed to them;
But with them there he did not linger long,
Ere each within in rivalry ran back.

They closed the portals, those our adversaries,
On my Lord's breast, who had remained without
And turned to me with footsteps far between.

His eyes cast down, his forehead shorn had he
Of all its boldness, and he said, with sighs,
Who has denied to me the dolesome houses?

And unto me: Thou, because I am angry,
Fear not, for I will conquer in the trial,
Whatever for defence within be planned.

This arrogance of theirs is nothing new;
For once they used it at less secret gate,
Which finds itself without a fastening still.

O'er it didst thou behold the dead inscription;
And now this side of it descends the steep,
Passing across the circles without escort,

One by whose means the city shall be opened.
That hue which cowardice brought out on me,
Beholding my Conductor backward turn,
Sooner repressed within him his new colour.

He stopped attentive, like a man who listens,
Because the eye could not conduct him far
Through the black air, and through the heavy fog.

Still it behoveth us to win the fight,
Began he; Else. . .Such offered us herself. . .
O how I long that some one here arrive!

Well I perceived, as soon as the beginning
He covered up with what came afterward,
That they were words quite different from the first;

But none the less his saying gave me fear,
Because I carried out the broken phrase,
Perhaps to a worse meaning than he had.

Into this bottom of the doleful conch
Doth any e'er descend from the first grade,
Which for its pain has only hope cut off?

This question put I; and he answered me:
Seldom it comes to pass that one of us
Maketh the journey upon which I go.

True is it, once before I here below
Was conjured by that pitiless Erictho,
Who summoned back the shades unto their bodies.

Naked of me short while the flesh had been,
Before within that wall she made me enter,
To bring a spirit from the circle of Judas;

That is the lowest region and the darkest,
And farthest from the heaven which circles all.
Well know I the way; therefore be reassured.

This fen, which a prodigious stench exhales,
Encompasses about the city dolent,
Where now we cannot enter without anger.

And more he said, but not in mind I have it;
Because mine eye had altogether drawn me
Tow'rds the high tower with the red-flaming summit,

Where in a moment saw I swift uprisen
The three infernal Furies stained with blood,
Who had the limbs of women and their mien,

And with the greenest hydras were begirt;
Small serpents and cerastes were their tresses,
Wherewith their horrid temples were entwined.

And he who well the handmaids of the Queen
Of everlasting lamentation knew,
Said unto me: Behold the fierce Erinnys.

This is Megaera, on the left-hand side;
She who is weeping on the right, Alecto;
Tisiphone is between; and then was silent.

Each one her breast was rending with her nails;
They beat them with their palms, and cried so loud,
That I for dread pressed close unto the Poet.

Medusa come, so we to stone will change him!
All shouted looking down; in evil hour
Avenged we not on Theseus his assault!

Turn thyself round, and keep thine eyes close shut,
For if the Gorgon appear, and thou shouldst see it,
No more returning upward would there be.

Thus said the Master; and he turned me round
Himself, and trusted not unto my hands
So far as not to blind me with his own.

O ye who have undistempered intellects,
Observe the doctrine that conceals itself
Beneath the veil of the mysterious verses!

And now there came across the turbid waves
The clangour of a sound with terror fraught,
Because of which both of the margins trembled;

Not otherwise it was than of a wind
Impetuous on account of adverse heats,
That smites the forest, and, without restraint,

The branches rends, beats down, and bears away;
Right onward, laden with dust, it goes superb,
And puts to flight the wild beasts and the shepherds.

Mine eyes he loosed, and said: Direct the nerve
Of vision now along that ancient foam,
There yonder where that smoke is most intense.

Even as the frogs before the hostile serpent
Across the water scatter all abroad,
Until each one is huddled in the earth.

More than a thousand ruined souls I saw,
Thus fleeing from before one who on foot
Was passing o'er the Styx with soles unwet.

From off his face he fanned that unctuous air,
Waving his left hand oft in front of him,
And only with that anguish seemed he weary.

Well I perceived one sent from Heaven was he,
And to the Master turned; and he made sign
That I should quiet stand, and bow before him.

Ah! how disdainful he appeared to me!
He reached the gate, and with a little rod
He opened it, for there was no resistance.

O banished out of Heaven, people despised!
Thus he began upon the horrid threshold;
Whence is this arrogance within you couched?

Wherefore recalcitrate against that will,
From which the end can never be cut off,
And which has many times increased your pain?

What helpeth it to butt against the fates?
Your Cerberus, if you remember well,
For that still bears his chin and gullet peeled.

Then he returned along the miry road,
And spake no word to us, but had the look
Of one whom other care constrains and goads

Than that of him who in his presence is;
And we our feet directed tow'rds the city,
After those holy words all confident.

Within we entered without any contest;
And I, who inclination had to see
What the condition such a fortress holds,

Soon as I was within, cast round mine eye,
And see on every hand an ample plain,
Full of distress and torment terrible.

Even as at Arles, where stagnant grows the Rhone,
Even as at Pola near to the Quarnaro,
That shuts in Italy and bathes its borders,

The sepulchres make all the place uneven;
So likewise did they there on every side,
Saving that there the manner was more bitter;

For flames between the sepulchres were scattered,
By which they so intensely heated were,
That iron more so asks not any art.

All of their coverings uplifted were,
And from them issued forth such dire laments,
Sooth seemed they of the wretched and tormented.

And I: My Master, what are all those people
Who, having sepulture within those tombs,
Make themselves audible by doleful sighs?

And he to me: Here are the Heresiarchs,
With their disciples of all sects, and much
More than thou thinkest laden are the tombs.

Here like together with its like is buried;
And more and less the monuments are heated.
And when he to the right had turned, we passed

Between the torments and high parapets.
Now onward goes, along a narrow path
Between the torments and the city wall,
My Master, and I follow at his back.

O power supreme, that through these impious circles
Turnest me, I began, as pleases thee,
Speak to me, and my longings satisfy;

The people who are lying in these tombs,
Might they be seen? already are uplifted
The covers all, and no one keepeth guard.

And he to me: They all will be closed up
When from Jehoshaphat they shall return
Here with the bodies they have left above.

Their cemetery have upon this side
With Epicurus all his followers,
Who with the body mortal make the soul;

But in the question thou dost put to me,
Within here shalt thou soon be satisfied,
And likewise in the wish thou keepest silent.

And I: Good Leader, I but keep concealed
From thee my heart, that I may speak the less,
Nor only now hast thou thereto disposed me.

O Tuscan, thou who through the city of fire
Goest alive, thus speaking modestly,
Be pleased to stay thy footsteps in this place.

Thy mode of speaking makes thee manifest
A native of that noble fatherland,
To which perhaps I too molestful was.

Upon a sudden issued forth this sound
From out one of the tombs; wherefore I pressed,
Fearing, a little nearer to my Leader.

And unto me he said: Turn thee; what dost thou?
Behold there Farinata who has risen;
From the waist upwards wholly shalt thou see him.

I had already fixed mine eyes on his,
And he uprose erect with breast and front
E'en as if Hell he had in great despite.

And with courageous hands and prompt my Leader
Thrust me between the sepulchres towards him,
Exclaiming, Let thy words explicit be.

As soon as I was at the foot of his tomb
Somewhat he eyed me, and, as if disdainful,
Then asked of me, Who were thine ancestors?

I, who desirous of obeying was,
Concealed it not, but all revealed to him;
Whereat he raised his brows a little upward.

Then said he: Fiercely adverse have they been
To me, and to my fathers, and my party;
So that two several times I scattered them.

If they were banished, they returned on all sides,
I answered him, the first time and the second;
But yours have not acquired that art aright.

Then there uprose upon the sight, uncovered
Down to the chin, a shadow at his side;
I think that he had risen on his knees.

Round me he gazed, as if solicitude
He had to see if some one else were with me,
But after his suspicion was all spent,

Weeping, he said to me: If through this blind
Prison thou goest by loftiness of genius,
Where is my son? and why is he not with thee?

And I to him: I come not of myself;
He who is waiting yonder leads me here,
Whom in disdain perhaps your Guido had.

His language and the mode of punishment
Already unto me had read his name;
On that account my answer was so full.

Up starting suddenly, he cried out: How
Saidst thou,--he had? Is he not still alive?
Does not the sweet light strike upon his eyes?

When he became aware of some delay,
Which I before my answer made, supine
He fell again, and forth appeared no more.

But the other, magnanimous, at whose desire
I had remained, did not his aspect change,
Neither his neck he moved, nor bent his side.

And if, continuing his first discourse,
They have that art, he said, not learned aright,
That more tormenteth me, than doth this bed.

But fifty times shall not rekindled be
The countenance of the Lady who reigns here,
Ere thou shalt know how heavy is that art;

And as thou wouldst to the sweet world return,
Say why that people is so pitiless
Against my race in each one of its laws?

Whence I to him: The slaughter and great carnage
Which have with crimson stained the Arbia, cause
Such orisons in our temple to be made.

After his head he with a sigh had shaken,
There I was not alone, he said, nor surely
Without a cause had with the others moved.

But there I was alone, where every one
Consented to the laying waste of Florence,
He who defended her with open face.

Ah! so hereafter may your seed repose,
I him entreated, solve for me that knot,
Which has entangled my conceptions here.

It seems that you can see, if I hear rightly,
Beforehand whatsoe'er time brings with it,
And in the present have another mode.

We see, like those who have imperfect sight,
The things, he said, that distant are from us;
So much still shines on us the Sovereign Ruler.

When they draw near, or are, is wholly vain
Our intellect, and if none brings it to us,
Not anything know we of your human state.

Hence thou canst understand, that wholly dead
Will be our knowledge from the moment when
The portal of the future shall be closed.

Then I, as if compunctious for my fault,
Said: Now, then, you will tell that fallen one,
That still his son is with the living joined.

And if just now, in answering, I was dumb,
Tell him I did it because I was thinking
Already of the error you have solved me.

And now my Master was recalling me,
Wherefore more eagerly I prayed the spirit
That he would tell me who was with him there.

He said: With more than a thousand here I lie;
Within here is the second Frederick,
And the Cardinal, and of the rest I speak not.

Thereon he hid himself; and I towards
The ancient poet turned my steps, reflecting
Upon that saying, which seemed hostile to me.

He moved along; and afterward thus going,
He said to me, Why art thou so bewildered?
And I in his inquiry satisfied him.

Let memory preserve what thou hast heard
Against thyself, that Sage commanded me,
And now attend here; and he raised his finger.

When thou shalt be before the radiance sweet
Of her whose beauteous eyes all things behold,
From her thou'lt know the journey of thy life.

Unto the left hand then he turned his feet;
We left the wall, and went towards the middle,
Along a path that strikes into a valley,

Which even up there unpleasant made its stench.
Upon the margin of a lofty bank
Which great rocks broken in a circle made,
We came upon a still more cruel throng;

And there, by reason of the horrible
Excess of stench the deep abyss throws out,
We drew ourselves aside behind the cover

Of a great tomb, whereon I saw a writing,
Which said: Pope Anastasius I hold,
Whom out of the right way Photinus drew.

Slow it behoveth our descent to be,
So that the sense be first a little used
To the sad blast, and then we shall not heed it.

The Master thus; and unto him I said,
Some compensation find, that the time pass not
Idly; and he: Thou seest I think of that.

My son, upon the inside of these rocks,
Began he then to say, are three small circles,
From grade to grade, like those which thou art leaving.

They all are full of spirits maledict;
But that hereafter sight alone suffice thee,
Hear how and wherefore they are in constraint.

Of every malice that wins hate in Heaven,
Injury is the end; and all such end
Either by force or fraud afflicteth others.

But because fraud is man's peculiar vice,
More it displeases God; and so stand lowest
The fraudulent, and greater dole assails them.

All the first circle of the Violent is;
But since force may be used against three persons,
In three rounds 'tis divided and constructed.

To God, to ourselves, and to our neighbour can we
Use force; I say on them and on their things,
As thou shalt hear with reason manifest.

A death by violence, and painful wounds,
Are to our neighbour given; and in his substance
Ruin, and arson, and injurious levies;

Whence homicides, and he who smites unjustly,
Marauders, and freebooters, the first round
Tormenteth all in companies diverse.

Man may lay violent hands upon himself
And his own goods; and therefore in the second
Round must perforce without avail repent

Whoever of your world deprives himself,
Who games, and dissipates his property,
And weepeth there, where he should jocund be.

Violence can be done the Deity,
In heart denying and blaspheming Him,
And by disdaining Nature and her bounty.

And for this reason doth the smallest round
Seal with its signet Sodom and Cahors,
And who, disdaining God, speaks from the heart.

Fraud, wherewithal is every conscience stung,
A man may practise upon him who trusts,
And him who doth no confidence imburse.

This latter mode, it would appear, dissevers
Only the bond of love which Nature makes;
Wherefore within the second circle nestle

Hypocrisy, flattery, and who deals in magic,
Falsification, theft, and simony,
Panders, and barrators, and the like filth.

By the other mode, forgotten is that love
Which Nature makes, and what is after added,
From which there is a special faith engendered.

Hence in the smallest circle, where the point is
Of the Universe, upon which Dis is seated,
Whoe'er betrays for ever is consumed.

And I: My Master, clear enough proceeds
Thy reasoning, and full well distinguishes
This cavern and the people who possess it.

But tell me, those within the fat lagoon,
Whom the wind drives, and whom the rain doth beat,
And who encounter with such bitter tongues,

Wherefore are they inside of the red city
Not punished, if God has them in his wrath,
And if he has not, wherefore in such fashion?

And unto me he said: Why wanders so
Thine intellect from that which it is wont?
Or, sooth, thy mind where is it elsewhere looking?

Hast thou no recollection of those words
With which thine Ethics thoroughly discusses
The dispositions three, that Heaven abides not,--

Incontinence, and Malice, and insane
Bestiality? and how Incontinence
Less God offendeth, and less blame attracts?

If thou regardest this conclusion well,
And to thy mind recallest who they are
That up outside are undergoing penance,

Clearly wilt thou perceive why from these felons
They separated are, and why less wroth
Justice divine doth smite them with its hammer.

O Sun, that healest all distempered vision,
Thou dost content me so, when thou resolvest,
That doubting pleases me no less than knowing!

Once more a little backward turn thee, said I,
There where thou sayest that usury offends
Goodness divine, and disengage the knot.

Philosophy, he said, to him who heeds it,
Noteth, not only in one place alone,
After what manner Nature takes her course

From Intellect Divine, and from its art;
And if thy Physics carefully thou notest,
After not many pages shalt thou find,

That this your art as far as possible
Follows, as the disciple doth the master;
So that your art is, as it were, God's grandchild.

From these two, if thou bringest to thy mind
Genesis at the beginning, it behoves
Mankind to gain their life and to advance;

And since the usurer takes another way,
Nature herself and in her follower
Disdains he, for elsewhere he puts his hope.

But follow, now, as I would fain go on,
For quivering are the Fishes on the horizon,
And the Wain wholly over Caurus lies,

And far beyond there we descend the crag.
The place where to descend the bank we came
Was alpine, and from what was there, moreover,
Of such a kind that every eye would shun it.

Such as that ruin is which in the flank
Smote, on this side of Trent, the Adige,
Either by earthquake or by failing stay,

For from the mountain's top, from which it moved,
Unto the plain the cliff is shattered so,
Some path 'twould give to him who was above;

Even such was the descent of that ravine,
And on the border of the broken chasm
The infamy of Crete was stretched along,

Who was conceived in the fictitious cow;
And when he us beheld, he bit himself,
Even as one whom anger racks within.

My Sage towards him shouted: Peradventure
Thou think'st that here may be the Duke of Athens,
Who in the world above brought death to thee?

Get thee gone, beast, for this one cometh not
Instructed by thy sister, but he comes
In order to behold your punishments.

As is that bull who breaks loose at the moment
In which he has received the mortal blow,
Who cannot walk, but staggers here and there,

The Minotaur beheld I do the like;
And he, the wary, cried: Run to the passage;
While he wroth, 'tis well thou shouldst descend.

Thus down we took our way o'er that discharge
Of stones, which oftentimes did move themselves
Beneath my feet, from the unwonted burden.

Thoughtful I went; and he said: Thou art thinking
Perhaps upon this ruin, which is guarded
By that brute anger which just now I quenched.

Now will I have thee know, the other time
I here descended to the nether Hell,
This precipice had not yet fallen down.

But truly, if I well discern, a little
Before His coming who the mighty spoil
Bore off from Dis, in the supernal circle,

Upon all sides the deep and loathsome valley
Trembled so, that I thought the Universe
Was thrilled with love, by which there are who think

The world ofttimes converted into chaos;
And at that moment this primeval crag
Both here and elsewhere made such overthrow.

But fix thine eyes below; for draweth near
The river of blood, within which boiling is
Whoe'er by violence doth injure others.

O blind cupidity, O wrath insane,
That spurs us onward so in our short life,
And in the eternal then so badly steeps us!

I saw an ample moat bent like a bow,
As one which all the plain encompasses,
Conformable to what my Guide had said.

And between this and the embankment's foot
Centaurs in file were running, armed with arrows,
As in the world they used the chase to follow.

Beholding us descend, each one stood still,
And from the squadron three detached themselves,
With bows and arrows in advance selected;

And from afar one cried: Unto what torment
Come ye, who down the hillside are descending?
Tell us from there; if not, I draw the bow.

My Master said: Our answer will we make
To Chiron, near you there; in evil hour,
That will of thine was evermore so hasty.

Then touched he me, and said: This one is Nessus,
Who perished for the lovely Dejanira,
And for himself, himself did vengeance take.

And he in the midst, who at his breast is gazing,
Is the great Chiron, who brought up Achilles;
That other Pholus is, who was so wrathful.

Thousands and thousands go about the moat
Shooting with shafts whatever soul emerges
Out of the blood, more than his crime allots.

Near we approached unto those monsters fleet;
Chiron an arrow took, and with the notch
Backward upon his jaws he put his beard.

After he had uncovered his great mouth,
He said to his companions: Are you ware
That he behind moveth whate'er he touches?

Thus are not wont to do the feet of dead men.
And my good Guide, who now was at his breast,
Where the two natures are together joined,

Replied: Indeed he lives, and thus alone
Me it behoves to show him the dark valley;
Necessity, and not delight, impels us.

Some one withdrew from singing Halleluja,
Who unto me committed this new office;
No thief is he, nor I a thievish spirit.

But by that virtue through which I am moving
My steps along this savage thoroughfare,
Give us some one of thine, to be with us,

And who may show us where to pass the ford,
And who may carry this one on his back;
For 'tis no spirit that can walk the air.

Upon his right breast Chiron wheeled about,
And said to Nessus: Turn and do thou guide them,
And warn aside, if other band may meet you.

We with our faithful escort onward moved
Along the brink of the vermilion boiling,
Wherein the boiled were uttering loud laments.

People I saw within up to the eyebrows,
And the great Centaur said: Tyrants are these,
Who dealt in bloodshed and in pillaging.

Here they lament their pitiless mischiefs; here
Is Alexander, and fierce Dionysius
Who upon Sicily brought dolorous years.

That forehead there which has the hair so black
Is Azzolin; and the other who is blond,
Obizzo is of Esti, who, in truth,

Up in the world was by his stepson slain.
Then turned I to the Poet; and he said,
Now he be first to thee, and second I.

A little farther on the Centaur stopped
Above a folk, who far down as the throat
Seemed from that boiling stream to issue forth.

A shade he showed us on one side alone,
Saying: He cleft asunder in God's bosom
The heart that still upon the Thames is honoured.

Then people saw I, who from out the river
Lifted their heads and also all the chest;
And many among these I recognised.

Thus ever more and more grew shallower
That blood, so that the feet alone it covered;
And there across the moat our passage was.

Even as thou here upon this side beholdest
The boiling stream, that aye diminishes,
The Centaur said, I wish thee to believe

That on this other more and more declines
Its bed, until it reunites itself
Where it behoveth tyranny to groan.

Justice divine, upon this side, is goading
That Attila, who was a scourge on earth,
And Pyrrhus, and Sextus; and for ever milks

The tears which with the boiling it unseals
In Rinier da Corneto and Rinier Pazzo,
Who made upon the highways so much war.

Then back he turned, and passed again the ford.
Not yet had Nessus reached the other side,
When we had put ourselves within a wood,
That was not marked by any path whatever.

Not foliage green, but of a dusky colour,
Not branches smooth, but gnarled and intertangled,
Not apple-trees were there, but thorns with poison.

Such tangled thickets have not, nor so dense,
Those savage wild beasts, that in hatred hold
'Twixt Cecina and Corneto the tilled places.

There do the hideous Harpies make their nests,
Who chased the Trojans from the Strophades,
With sad announcement of impending doom;

Broad wings have they, and necks and faces human,
And feet with claws, and their great bellies fledged;
They make laments upon the wondrous trees.

And the good Master: Ere thou enter farther,
Know that thou art within the second round,
Thus he began to say, and shalt be, till

Thou comest out upon the horrible sand;
Therefore look well around, and thou shalt see
Things that will credence give unto my speech.

I heard on all sides lamentations uttered,
And person none beheld I who might make them,
Whence, utterly bewildered, I stood still.

I think he thought that I perhaps might think
So many voices issued through those trunks
From people who concealed themselves from us;

Therefore the Master said: If thou break off
Some little spray from any of these trees,
The thoughts thou hast will wholly be made vain.

Then stretched I forth my hand a little forward,
And plucked a branchlet off from a great thorn;
And the trunk cried, Why dost thou mangle me?

After it had become embrowned with blood,
It recommenced its cry: Why dost thou rend me?
Hast thou no spirit of pity whatsoever?

Men once we were, and now are changed to trees;
Indeed, thy hand should be more pitiful,
Even if the souls of serpents we had been.

As out of a green brand, that is on fire
At one of the ends, and from the other drips
And hisses with the wind that is escaping;

So from that splinter issued forth together
Both words and blood; whereat I let the tip
Fall, and stood like a man who is afraid.

Had he been able sooner to believe,
My Sage made answer, O thou wounded soul,
What only in my verses he has seen,

Not upon thee had he stretched forth his hand;
Whereas the thing incredible has caused me
To put him to an act which grieveth me.

But tell him who thou wast, so that by way
Of some amends thy fame he may refresh
Up in the world, to which he can return.

And the trunk said: So thy sweet words allure me,
I cannot silent be; and you be vexed not,
That I a little to discourse am tempted.

I am the one who both keys had in keeping
Of Frederick's heart, and turned them to and fro
So softly in unlocking and in locking,

That from his secrets most men I withheld;
Fidelity I bore the glorious office
So great, I lost thereby my sleep and pulses.

The courtesan who never from the dwelling
Of Caesar turned aside her strumpet eyes,
Death universal and the vice of courts,

Inflamed against me all the other minds,
And they, inflamed, did so inflame Augustus,
That my glad honours turned to dismal mournings.

My spirit, in disdainful exultation,
Thinking by dying to escape disdain,
Made me unjust against myself, the just.

I, by the roots unwonted of this wood,
Do swear to you that never broke I faith
Unto my lord, who was so worthy of honour;

And to the world if one of you return,
Let him my memory comfort, which is lying
Still prostrate from the blow that envy dealt it.

Waited awhile, and then: Since he is silent,
The Poet said to me, lose not the time,
But speak, and question him, if more may please thee.

Whence I to him: Do thou again inquire
Concerning what thou thinks't will satisfy me;
For I cannot, such pity is in my heart.

Therefore he recommenced: So may the man
Do for thee freely what thy speech implores,
Spirit incarcerate, again be pleased

To tell us in what way the soul is bound
Within these knots; and tell us, if thou canst,
If any from such members e'er is freed.

Then blew the trunk amain, and afterward
The wind was into such a voice converted:
With brevity shall be replied to you.

When the exasperated soul abandons
The body whence it rent itself away,
Minos consigns it to the seventh abyss.

It falls into the forest, and no part
Is chosen for it; but where Fortune hurls it,
There like a grain of spelt it germinates.

It springs a sapling, and a forest tree;
The Harpies, feeding then upon its leaves,
Do pain create, and for the pain an outlet.

Like others for our spoils shall we return;
But not that any one may them revest,
For 'tis not just to have what one casts off.

Here we shall drag them, and along the dismal
Forest our bodies shall suspended be,
Each to the thorn of his molested shade.

We were attentive still unto the trunk,
Thinking that more it yet might wish to tell us,
When by a tumult we were overtaken,

In the same way as he is who perceives
The boar and chase approaching to his stand,
Who hears the crashing of the beasts and branches;

And two behold! upon our left-hand side,
Naked and scratched, fleeing so furiously,
That of the forest, every fan they broke.

He who was in advance: Now help, Death, help!
And the other one, who seemed to lag too much,
Was shouting: Lano, were not so alert

Those legs of thine at joustings of the Toppo!
And then, perchance because his breath was failing,
He grouped himself together with a bush.

Behind them was the forest full of black
She-mastiffs, ravenous, and swift of foot
As greyhounds, who are issuing from the chain.

On him who had crouched down they set their teeth,
And him they lacerated piece by piece,
Thereafter bore away those aching members.

Thereat my Escort took me by the hand,
And led me to the bush, that all in vain
Was weeping from its bloody lacerations.

O Jacopo, it said, of Sant' Andrea,
What helped it thee of me to make a screen?
What blame have I in thy nefarious life?

When near him had the Master stayed his steps,
He said: Who wast thou, that through wounds so many
Art blowing out with blood thy dolorous speech?

And he to us: O souls, that hither come
To look upon the shameful massacre
That has so rent away from me my leaves,

Gather them up beneath the dismal bush;
I of that city was which to the Baptist
Changed its first patron, wherefore he for this

Forever with his art will make it sad.
And were it not that on the pass of Arno
Some glimpses of him are remaining still,

Those citizens, who afterwards rebuilt it
Upon the ashes left by Attila,
In vain had caused their labour to be done.

Of my own house I made myself a gibbet.
Because the charity of my native place
Constrained me, gathered I the scattered leaves,
And gave them back to him, who now was hoarse.

Then came we to the confine, where disparted
The second round is from the third, and where
A horrible form of Justice is beheld.

Clearly to manifest these novel things,
I say that we arrived upon a plain,
Which from its bed rejecteth every plant;

The dolorous forest is a garland to it
All round about, as the sad moat to that;
There close upon the edge we stayed our feet.

The soil was of an arid and thick sand,
Not of another fashion made than that
Which by the feet of Cato once was pressed.

Vengeance of God, O how much oughtest thou
By each one to be dreaded, who doth read
That which was manifest unto mine eyes!

Of naked souls beheld I many herds,
Who all were weeping very miserably,
And over them seemed set a law diverse.

Supine upon the ground some folk were lying;
And some were sitting all drawn up together,
And others went about continually.

Those who were going round were far the more,
And those were less who lay down to their torment,
But had their tongues more loosed to lamentation.

O'er all the sand-waste, with a gradual fall,
Were raining down dilated flakes of fire,
As of the snow on Alp without a wind.

As Alexander, in those torrid parts
Of India, beheld upon his host
Flames fall unbroken till they reached the ground.

Whence he provided with his phalanxes
To trample down the soil, because the vapour
Better extinguished was while it was single;

Thus was descending the eternal heat,
Whereby the sand was set on fire, like tinder
Beneath the steel, for doubling of the dole.

Without repose forever was the dance
Of miserable hands, now there, now here,
Shaking away from off them the fresh gleeds.

Master, began I, thou who overcomest
All things except the demons dire, that issued
Against us at the entrance of the gate,

Who is that mighty one who seems to heed not
The fire, and lieth lowering and disdainful,
So that the rain seems not to ripen him?

And he himself, who had become aware
That I was questioning my Guide about him,
Cried: Such as I was living, am I, dead.

If Jove should weary out his smith, from whom
He seized in anger the sharp thunderbolt,
Wherewith upon the last day I was smitten,

And if he wearied out by turns the others
In Mongibello at the swarthy forge,
Vociferating, 'Help, good Vulcan, help!'

Even as he did there at the fight of Phlegra,
And shot his bolts at me with all his might,
He would not have thereby a joyous vengeance.

Then did my Leader speak with such great force,
That I had never heard him speak so loud:
O Capaneus, in that is not extinguished

Thine arrogance, thou punished art the more;
Not any torment, saving thine own rage,
Would be unto thy fury pain complete.

Then he turned round to me with better lip,
Saying: One of the Seven Kings was he
Who Thebes besieged, and held, and seems to hold

God in disdain, and little seems to prize him;
But, as I said to him, his own despites
Are for his breast the fittest ornaments.

Now follow me, and mind thou do not place
As yet thy feet upon the burning sand,
But always keep them close unto the wood.

Speaking no word, we came to where there gushes
Forth from the wood a little rivulet,
Whose redness makes my hair still stand on end.

As from the Bulicame springs the brooklet,
The sinful women later share among them,
So downward through the sand it went its way.

The bottom of it, and both sloping banks,
Were made of stone, and the margins at the side;
Whence I perceived that there the passage was.

In all the rest which I have shown to thee
Since we have entered in within the gate
Whose threshold unto no one is denied,

Nothing has been discovered by thine eyes
So notable as is the present river,
Which all the little flames above it quenches.

These words were of my Leader; whence I prayed him
That he would give me largess of the food,
For which he had given me largess of desire.

In the mid-sea there sits a wasted land,
Said he thereafterward, whose name is Crete,
Under whose king the world of old was chaste.

There is a mountain there, that once was glad
With waters and with leaves, which was called Ida;
Now 'tis deserted, as a thing worn out.

Rhea once chose it for the faithful cradle
Of her own son; and to conceal him better,
Whene'er he cried, she there had clamours made.

A grand old man stands in the mount erect,
Who holds his shoulders turned tow'rds Damietta,
And looks at Rome as if it were his mirror.

His head is fashioned of refined gold,
And of pure silver are the arms and breast;
Then he is brass as far down as the fork.

From that point downward all is chosen iron,
Save that the right foot is of kiln-baked clay,
And more he stands on that than on the other.

Each part, except the gold, is by a fissure
Asunder cleft, that dripping is with tears,
Which gathered together perforate that cavern.

From rock to rock they fall into this valley;
Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon they form;
Then downward go along this narrow sluice

Unto that point where is no more descending.
They form Cocytus; what that pool may be
Thou shalt behold, so here 'tis not narrated.

And I to him: If so the present runnel
Doth take its rise in this way from our world,
Why only on this verge appears it to us?

And he to me: Thou knowest the place is round,
And notwithstanding thou hast journeyed far,
Still to the left descending to the bottom,

Thou hast not yet through all the circle turned.
Therefore if something new appear to us,
It should not bring amazement to thy face.

And I again: Master, where shall be found
Lethe and Phlegethon, for of one thou'rt silent,
And sayest the other of this rain is made?

In all thy questions truly thou dost please me,
Replied he; but the boiling of the red
Water might well solve one of them thou makest.

Thou shalt see Lethe, but outside this moat,
There where the souls repair to lave themselves,
When sin repented of has been removed.

Then said he: It is time now to abandon
The wood; take heed that thou come after me;
A way the margins make that are not burning,

And over them all vapours are extinguished.
Now bears us onward one of the hard margins,
And so the brooklet's mist o'ershadows it,
From fire it saves the water and the dikes.

Even as the Flemings, 'twixt Cadsand and Bruges,
Fearing the flood that tow'rds them hurls itself,
Their bulwarks build to put the sea to flight;

And as the Paduans along the Brenta,
To guard their villas and their villages,
Or ever Chiarentana feel the heat;

In such similitude had those been made,
Albeit not so lofty nor so thick,
Whoever he might be, the master made them.

Now were we from the forest so remote,
I could not have discovered where it was,
Even if backward I had turned myself,

When we a company of souls encountered,
Who came beside the dike, and every one
Gazed at us, as at evening we are wont

To eye each other under a new moon,
And so towards us sharpened they their brows
As an old tailor at the needle's eye.

Thus scrutinised by such a family,
By some one I was recognised, who seized
My garment's hem, and cried out, What a marvel!

And I, when he stretched forth his arm to me,
On his baked aspect fastened so mine eyes,
That the scorched countenance prevented not

His recognition by my intellect;
And bowing down my face unto his own,
I made reply, Are you here, Ser Brunetto?

And he: May't not displease thee, O my son,
If a brief space with thee Brunetto Latini
Backward return and let the trail go on.

I said to him: With all my power I ask it;
And if you wish me to sit down with you,
I will, if he please, for I go with him.

O son, he said, whoever of this herd
A moment stops, lies then a hundred years,
Nor fans himself when smiteth him the fire.

Therefore go on; I at thy skirts will come,
And afterward will I rejoin my band,
Which goes lamenting its eternal doom.

I did not dare to go down from the road
Level to walk with him; but my head bowed
I held as one who goeth reverently.

And he began: What fortune or what fate
Before the last day leadeth thee down here?
And who is this that showeth thee the way?

Up there above us in the life serene,
I answered him, I lost me in a valley,
Or ever yet my age had been completed.

But yestermorn I turned my back upon it;
This one appeared to me, returning thither,
And homeward leadeth me along this road.

And he to me: If thou thy star do follow,
Thou canst not fail thee of a glorious port,
If well I judged in the life beautiful.

And if I had not died so prematurely,
Seeing Heaven thus benignant unto thee,
I would have given thee comfort in the work.

But that ungrateful and malignant people,
Which of old time from Fesole descended,
And smacks still of the mountain and the granite,

Will make itself, for thy good deeds, thy foe;
And it is right; for among crabbed sorbs
It ill befits the sweet fig to bear fruit.

Old rumour in the world proclaims them blind;
A people avaricious, envious, proud;
Take heed that of their customs thou do cleanse thee.

Thy fortune so much honour doth reserve thee,
One party and the other shall be hungry
For thee; but far from goat shall be the grass.

Their litter let the beasts of Fesole
Make of themselves, nor let them touch the plant,
If any still upon their dunghill rise,

In which may yet revive the consecrated
Seed of those Romans, who remained there when
The nest of such great malice it became.

If my entreaty wholly were fulfilled,
Replied I to him, not yet would you be
In banishment from human nature placed;

For in my mind is fixed, and touches now
My heart the dear and good paternal image
Of you, when in the world from hour to hour

You taught me how a man becomes eternal;
And how much I am grateful, while I live
Behoves that in my language be discerned.

What you narrate of my career I write,
And keep it to be glossed with other text
By a Lady who can do it, if I reach her.

This much will I have manifest to you;
Provided that my conscience do not chide me,
For whatsoever Fortune I am ready.

Such handsel is not new unto mine ears;
Therefore let Fortune turn her wheel around
As it may please her, and the churl his mattock.

My Master thereupon on his right cheek
Did backward turn himself, and looked at me;
Then said: He listeneth well who noteth it.

Nor speaking less on that account, I go
With Ser Brunetto, and I ask who are
His most known and most eminent companions.

And he to me: To know of some is well;
Of others it were laudable to be silent,
For short would be the time for so much speech.

Know them in sum, that all of them were clerks,
And men of letters great and of great fame,
In the world tainted with the selfsame sin.

Priscian goes yonder with that wretched crowd,
And Francis of Accorso; and thou hadst seen there
If thou hadst had a hankering for such scurf,

That one, who by the Servant of the Servants
From Arno was transferred to Bacchiglione,
Where he has left his sin-excited nerves.

More would I say, but coming and discoursing
Can be no longer; for that I behold
New smoke uprising yonder from the sand.

A people comes with whom I may not be;
Commended unto thee be my Tesoro,
In which I still live, and no more I ask.

Then he turned round, and seemed to be of those
Who at Verona run for the Green Mantle
Across the plain; and seemed to be among them

The one who wins, and not the one who loses.
Now was I where was heard the reverberation
Of water falling into the next round,
Like to that humming which the beehives make,

When shadows three together started forth,
Running, from out a company that passed
Beneath the rain of the sharp martyrdom.

Towards us came they, and each one cried out:
Stop, thou; for by thy garb to us thou seemest
To be some one of our depraved city.

Ah me! what wounds I saw upon their limbs,
Recent and ancient by the flames burnt in!
It pains me still but to remember it.

Unto their cries my Teacher paused attentive;
He turned his face towards me, and Now wait,
He said; to these we should be courteous.

And if it were not for the fire that darts
The nature of this region, I should say
That haste were more becoming thee than them.

As soon as we stood still, they recommenced
The old refrain, and when they overtook us,
Formed of themselves a wheel, all three of them.

As champions stripped and oiled are wont to do,
Watching for their advantage and their hold,
Before they come to blows and thrusts between them,

Thus, wheeling round, did every one his visage
Direct to me, so that in opposite wise
His neck and feet continual journey made.

And, If the misery of this soft place
Bring in disdain ourselves and our entreaties,
Began one, and our aspect black and blistered,

Let the renown of us thy mind incline
To tell us who thou art, who thus securely
Thy living feet dost move along through Hell.

He in whose footprints thou dost see me treading,
Naked and skinless though he now may go,
Was of a greater rank than thou dost think;

He was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;
His name was Guidoguerra, and in life
Much did he with his wisdom and his sword.

The other, who close by me treads the sand,
Tegghiaio Aldobrandi is, whose fame
Above there in the world should welcome be.

And I, who with them on the cross am placed,
Jacopo Rusticucci was; and truly
My savage wife, more than aught else, doth harm me.

Could I have been protected from the fire,
Below I should have thrown myself among them,
And think the Teacher would have suffered it;

But as I should have burned and baked myself,
My terror overmastered my good will,
Which made me greedy of embracing them.

Then I began: Sorrow and not disdain
Did your condition fix within me so,
That tardily it wholly is stripped off,

As soon as this my Lord said unto me
Words, on account of which I thought within me
That people such as you are were approaching.

I of your city am; and evermore
Your labours and your honourable names
I with affection have retraced and heard.

I leave the gall, and go for the sweet fruits
Promised to me by the veracious Leader;
But to the centre first I needs must plunge.

So may the soul for a long while conduct
Those limbs of thine, did he make answer then,
And so may thy renown shine after thee,

Valour and courtesy, say if they dwell
Within our city, as they used to do,
Or if they wholly have gone out of it;

For Guglielmo Borsier, who is in torment
With us of late, and goes there with his comrades,
Doth greatly mortify us with his words.

The new inhabitants and the sudden gains,
Pride and extravagance have in thee engendered,
Florence, so that thou weep'st thereat already!

In this wise I exclaimed with face uplifted;
And the three, taking that for my reply,
Looked at each other, as one looks at truth.

If other times so little it doth cost thee,
Replied they all, to satisfy another,
Happy art thou, thus speaking at thy will!

Therefore, if thou escape from these dark places,
And come to rebehold the beauteous stars,
When it shall pleasure thee to say, 'I was,'

See that thou speak of us unto the people.
Then they broke up the wheel, and in their flight
It seemed as if their agile legs were wings.

Not an Amen could possibly be said
So rapidly as they had disappeared;
Wherefore the Master deemed best to depart.

I followed him, and little had we gone,
Before the sound of water was so near us,
That speaking we should hardly have been heard.

Even as that stream which holdeth its own course
The first from Monte Veso tow'rds the East,
Upon the left-hand slope of Apennine,

Which is above called Acquacheta, ere
It down descendeth into its low bed,
And at Forli is vacant of that name,

Reverberates there above San Benedetto
From Alps, by falling at a single leap,
Where for a thousand there were room enough;

Thus downward from a bank precipitate,
We found resounding that dark-tinted water,
So that it soon the ear would have offended.

I had a cord around about me girt,
And therewithal I whilom had designed
To take the panther with the painted skin.

After I this had all from me unloosed,
As my Conductor had commanded me,
I reached it to him, gathered up and coiled,

Whereat he turned himself to the right side,
And at a little distance from the verge,
He cast it down into that deep abyss.

It must needs be some novelty respond,
I said within myself, to the new signal
The Master with his eye is following so.

Ah me! how very cautious men should be
With those who not alone behold the act,
But with their wisdom look into the thoughts!

He said to me: Soon there will upward come
What I await; and what thy thought is dreaming
Must soon reveal itself unto thy sight.

Aye to that truth which has the face of falsehood,
A man should close his lips as far as may be,
Because without his fault it causes shame;

But here I cannot; and, Reader, by the notes
Of this my Comedy to thee I swear,
So may they not be void of lasting favour,

Athwart that dense and darksome atmosphere
I saw a figure swimming upward come,
Marvellous unto every steadfast heart,

Even as he returns who goeth down
Sometimes to clear an anchor, which has grappled
Reef, or aught else that in the sea is hidden,

Who upward stretches, and draws in his feet.
Behold the monster with the pointed tail,
Who cleaves the hills, and breaketh walls and weapons,
Behold him who infecteth all the world.

Thus unto me my Guide began to say,
And beckoned him that he should come to shore,
Near to the confine of the trodden marble;

And that uncleanly image of deceit
Came up and thrust ashore its head and bust,
But on the border did not drag its tail.

The face was as the face of a just man,
Its semblance outwardly was so benign,
And of a serpent all the trunk beside.

Two paws it had, hairy unto the armpits;
The back, and breast, and both the sides it had
Depicted o'er with nooses and with shields.

With colours more, groundwork or broidery
Never in cloth did Tartars make nor Turks,
Nor were such tissues by Arachne laid.

As sometimes wherries lie upon the shore,
That part are in the water, part on land;
And as among the guzzling Germans there,

The beaver plants himself to wage his war;
So that vile monster lay upon the border,
Which is of stone, and shutteth in the sand.

His tail was wholly quivering in the void,
Contorting upwards the envenomed fork,
That in the guise of scorpion armed its point.

The Guide said: Now perforce must turn aside
Our way a little, even to that beast
Malevolent, that yonder coucheth him.

We therefore on the right side descended,
And made ten steps upon the outer verge,
Completely to avoid the sand and flame;

And after we are come to him, I see
A little farther off upon the sand
A people sitting near the hollow place.

Then said to me the Master: So that full
Experience of this round thou bear away,
Now go and see what their condition is.

There let thy conversation be concise;
Till thou returnest I will speak with him,
That he concede to us his stalwart shoulders.

Thus farther still upon the outermost
Head of that seventh circle all alone
I went, where sat the melancholy folk.

Out of their eyes was gushing forth their woe;
This way, that way, they helped them with their hands
Now from the flames and now from the hot soil.

Not otherwise in summer do the dogs,
Now with the foot, now with the muzzle, when
By fleas, or flies, or gadflies, they are bitten.

When I had turned mine eyes upon the faces
Of some, on whom the dolorous fire is falling,
Not one of them I knew; but I perceived

That from the neck of each there hung a pouch,
Which certain colour had, and certain blazon;
And thereupon it seems their eyes are feeding.

And as I gazing round me come among them,
Upon a yellow pouch I azure saw
That had the face and posture of a lion.

Proceeding then the current of my sight,
Another of them saw I, red as blood,
Display a goose more white than butter is.

And one, who with an azure sow and gravid
Emblazoned had his little pouch of white,
Said unto me: What dost thou in this moat?

Now get thee gone; and since thou'rt still alive,
Know that a neighbour of mine, Vitaliano,
Will have his seat here on my left-hand side.

A Paduan am I with these Florentines;
Full many a time they thunder in mine ears,
Exclaiming, 'Come the sovereign cavalier,

He who shall bring the satchel with three goats;'
Then twisted he his mouth, and forth he thrust
His tongue, like to an ox that licks its nose.

And fearing lest my longer stay might vex
Him who had warned me not to tarry long,
Backward I turned me from those weary souls.

I found my Guide, who had already mounted
Upon the back of that wild animal,
And said to me: Now be both strong and bold.

Now we descend by stairways such as these;
Mount thou in front, for I will be midway,
So that the tail may have no power to harm thee.

Such as he is who has so near the ague
Of quartan that his nails are blue already,
And trembles all, but looking at the shade;

Even such became I at those proffered words;
But shame in me his menaces produced,
Which maketh servant strong before good master.

I seated me upon those monstrous shoulders;
I wished to say, and yet the voice came not
As I believed, Take heed that thou embrace me.

But he, who other times had rescued me
In other peril, soon as I had mounted,
Within his arms encircled and sustained me,

And said: Now, Geryon, bestir thyself;
The circles large, and the descent be little;
Think of the novel burden which thou hast.

Even as the little vessel shoves from shore,
Backward, still backward, so he thence withdrew;
And when he wholly felt himself afloat,

There where his breast had been he turned his tail,
And that extended like an eel he moved,
And with his paws drew to himself the air.

A greater fear I do not think there was
What time abandoned Phaeton the reins,
Whereby the heavens, as still appears, were scorched;

Nor when the wretched Icarus his flanks
Felt stripped of feathers by the melting wax,
His father crying, An ill way thou takest!

Than was my own, when I perceived myself
On all sides in the air, and saw extinguished
The sight of everything but of the monster.

Onward he goeth, swimming slowly, slowly;
Wheels and descends, but I perceive it only
By wind upon my face and from below.

I heard already on the right the whirlpool
Making a horrible crashing under us;
Whence I thrust out my head with eyes cast downward.

Then was I still more fearful of the abyss;
Because I fires beheld, and heard laments,
Whereat I, trembling, all the closer cling.

I saw then, for before I had not seen it,
The turning and descending, by great horrors
That were approaching upon divers sides.

As falcon who has long been on the wing,
Who, without seeing either lure or bird,
Maketh the falconer say, Ah me, thou stoopest,

Descendeth weary, whence he started swiftly,
Thorough a hundred circles, and alights
Far from his master, sullen and disdainful;

Even thus did Geryon place us on the bottom,
Close to the bases of the rough-hewn rock,
And being disencumbered of our persons,

He sped away as arrow from the string.
There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,
Wholly of stone and of an iron colour,
As is the circle that around it turns.

Right in the middle of the field malign
There yawns a well exceeding wide and deep,
Of which its place the structure will recount.

Round, then, is that enclosure which remains
Between the well and foot of the high, hard bank,
And has distinct in valleys ten its bottom.

As where for the protection of the walls
Many and many moats surround the castles,
The part in which they are a figure forms,

Just such an image those presented there;
And as about such strongholds from their gates
Unto the outer bank are little bridges,

So from the precipice's base did crags
Project, which intersected dikes and moats,
Unto the well that truncates and collects them.

Within this place, down shaken from the back
Of Geryon, we found us; and the Poet
Held to the left, and I moved on behind.

Upon my right hand I beheld new anguish,
New torments, and new wielders of the lash,
Wherewith the foremost Bolgia was replete.

Down at the bottom were the sinners naked;
This side the middle came they facing us,
Beyond it, with us, but with greater steps;

Even as the Romans, for the mighty host,
The year of Jubilee, upon the bridge,
Have chosen a mode to pass the people over;

For all upon one side towards the Castle
Their faces have, and go unto St. Peter's;
On the other side they go towards the Mountain.

This side and that, along the livid stone
Beheld I horned demons with great scourges,
Who cruelly were beating them behind.

Ah me! how they did make them lift their legs
At the first blows! and sooth not any one
The second waited for, nor for the third.

While I was going on, mine eyes by one
Encountered were; and straight I said: Already
With sight of this one I am not unfed.

Therefore I stayed my feet to make him out,
And with me the sweet Guide came to a stand,
And to my going somewhat back assented;

And he, the scourged one, thought to hide himself,
Lowering his face, but little it availed him;
For said I: Thou that castest down thine eyes,

If false are not the features which thou bearest,
Thou art Venedico Caccianimico;
But what doth bring thee to such pungent sauces?

And he to me: Unwillingly I tell it;
But forces me thine utterance distinct,
Which makes me recollect the ancient world.

I was the one who the fair Ghisola
Induced to grant the wishes of the Marquis,
Howe'er the shameless story may be told.

Not the sole Bolognese am I who weeps here;
Nay, rather is this place so full of them,
That not so many tongues to-day are taught

'Twixt Reno and Savena to say 'sipa;'
And if thereof thou wishest pledge or proof,
Bring to thy mind our avaricious heart.

While speaking in this manner, with his scourge
A demon smote him, and said: Get thee gone
Pander, there are no women here for coin.

I joined myself again unto mine Escort;
Thereafterward with footsteps few we came
To where a crag projected from the bank.

This very easily did we ascend,
And turning to the right along its ridge,
From those eternal circles we departed.

When we were there, where it is hollowed out
Beneath, to give a passage to the scourged,
The Guide said: Wait, and see that on thee strike

The vision of those others evil-born,
Of whom thou hast not yet beheld the faces,
Because together with us they have gone.

From the old bridge we looked upon the train
Which tow'rds us came upon the other border,
And which the scourges in like manner smite.

And the good Master, without my inquiring,
Said to me: See that tall one who is coming,
And for his pain seems not to shed a tear;

Still what a royal aspect he retains!
That Jason is, who by his heart and cunning
The Colchians of the Ram made destitute.

He by the isle of Lemnos passed along
After the daring women pitiless
Had unto death devoted all their males.

There with his tokens and with ornate words
Did he deceive Hypsipyle, the maiden
Who first, herself, had all the rest deceived.

There did he leave her pregnant and forlorn;
Such sin unto such punishment condemns him,
And also for Medea is vengeance done.

With him go those who in such wise deceive;
And this sufficient be of the first valley
To know, and those that in its jaws it holds.

We were already where the narrow path
Crosses athwart the second dike, and forms
Of that a buttress for another arch.

Thence we heard people, who are making moan
In the next Bolgia, snorting with their muzzles,
And with their palms beating upon themselves

The margins were incrusted with a mould
By exhalation from below, that sticks there,
And with the eyes and nostrils wages war.

The bottom is so deep, no place suffices
To give us sight of it, without ascending
The arch's back, where most the crag impends.

Thither we came, and thence down in the moat
I saw a people smothered in a filth
That out of human privies seemed to flow;

And whilst below there with mine eye I search,
I saw one with his head so foul with ordure,
It was not clear if he were clerk or layman.

He screamed to me: Wherefore art thou so eager
To look at me more than the other foul ones?
And I to him: Because, if I remember,

I have already seen thee with dry hair,
And thou'rt Alessio Interminei of Lucca;
Therefore I eye thee more than all the others.

And he thereon, belabouring his pumpkin:
The flatteries have submerged me here below,
Wherewith my tongue was never surfeited.

Then said to me the Guide: See that thou thrust
Thy visage somewhat farther in advance,
That with thine eyes thou well the face attain

Of that uncleanly and dishevelled drab,
Who there doth scratch herself with filthy nails,
And crouches now, and now on foot is standing.

Thais the harlot is it, who replied
Unto her paramour, when he said, 'Have I
Great gratitude from thee?'--'Nay, marvellous;'

And herewith let our sight be satisfied.
O Simon Magus, O forlorn disciples,
Ye who the things of God, which ought to be
The brides of holiness, rapaciously

For silver and for gold do prostitute,
Now it behoves for you the trumpet sound,
Because in this third Bolgia ye abide.

We had already on the following tomb
Ascended to that portion of the crag
Which o'er the middle of the moat hangs plumb.

Wisdom supreme, O how great art thou showest
In heaven, in earth, and in the evil world,
And with what justice doth thy power distribute!

I saw upon the sides and on the bottom
The livid stone with perforations filled,
All of one size, and every one was round.

To me less ample seemed they not, nor greater
Than those that in my beautiful Saint John
Are fashioned for the place of the baptisers,

And one of which, not many years ago,
I broke for some one, who was drowning in it;
Be this a seal all men to undeceive.

Out of the mouth of each one there protruded
The feet of a transgressor, and the legs
Up to the calf, the rest within remained.

In all of them the soles were both on fire;
Wherefore the joints so violently quivered,
They would have snapped asunder withes and bands.

Even as the flame of unctuous things is wont
To move upon the outer surface only,
So likewise was it there from heel to point.

Master, who is that one who writhes himself,
More than his other comrades quivering,
I said, and whom a redder flame is sucking?

And he to me: If thou wilt have me bear thee
Down there along that bank which lowest lies,
From him thou'lt know his errors and himself.

And I: What pleases thee, to me is pleasing;
Thou art my Lord, and knowest that I depart not
From thy desire, and knowest what is not spoken.

Straightway upon the fourth dike we arrived;
We turned, and on the left-hand side descended
Down to the bottom full of holes and narrow.

And the good Master yet from off his haunch
Deposed me not, till to the hole he brought me
Of him who so lamented with his shanks.

Whoe'er thou art, that standest upside down,
O doleful soul, implanted like a stake,
To say began I, if thou canst, speak out.

I stood even as the friar who is confessing
The false assassin, who, when he is fixed,
Recalls him, so that death may be delayed.

And he cried out: Dost thou stand there already,
Dost thou stand there already, Boniface?
By many years the record lied to me.

Art thou so early satiate with that wealth,
For which thou didst not fear to take by fraud
The beautiful Lady, and then work her woe?

Such I became, as people are who stand,
Not comprehending what is answered them,
As if bemocked, and know not how to answer.

Then said Virgilius: Say to him straightway,
'I am not he, I am not he thou thinkest.'
And I replied as was imposed on me.

Whereat the spirit writhed with both his feet,
Then, sighing, with a voice of lamentation
Said to me: Then what wantest thou of me?

If who I am thou carest so much to know,
That thou on that account hast crossed the bank,
Know that I vested was with the great mantle;

And truly was I son of the She-bear,
So eager to advance the cubs, that wealth
Above, and here myself, I pocketed.

Beneath my head the others are dragged down
Who have preceded me in simony,
Flattened along the fissure of the rock.

Below there I shall likewise fall, whenever
That one shall come who I believed thou wast,
What time the sudden question I proposed.

But longer I my feet already toast,
And here have been in this way upside down,
Than he will planted stay with reddened feet;

For after him shall come of fouler deed
From tow'rds the west a Pastor without law,
Such as befits to cover him and me.

New Jason will he be, of whom we read
In Maccabees; and as his king was pliant,
So he who governs France shall be to this one.

I do not know if I were here too bold,
That him I answered only in this metre:
I pray thee tell me now how great a treasure

Our Lord demanded of Saint Peter first,
Before he put the keys into his keeping?
Truly he nothing asked but 'Follow me.'

Nor Peter nor the rest asked of Matthias
Silver or gold, when he by lot was chosen
Unto the place the guilty soul had lost.

Therefore stay here, for thou art justly punished,
And keep safe guard o'er the ill-gotten money,
Which caused thee to be valiant against Charles.

And were it not that still forbids it me
The reverence for the keys superlative
Thou hadst in keeping in the gladsome life,

I would make use of words more grievous still;
Because your avarice afflicts the world,
Trampling the good and lifting the depraved.

The Evangelist you Pastors had in mind,
When she who sitteth upon many waters
To fornicate with kings by him was seen;

The same who with the seven heads was born,
And power and strength from the ten horns received,
So long as virtue to her spouse was pleasing.

Ye have made yourselves a god of gold and silver;
And from the idolater how differ ye,
Save that he one, and ye a hundred worship?

Ah, Constantine! of how much ill was mother,
Not thy conversion, but that marriage dower
Which the first wealthy Father took from thee!

And while I sang to him such notes as these,
Either that anger or that conscience stung him,
He struggled violently with both his feet.

I think in sooth that it my Leader pleased,
With such contented lip he listened ever
Unto the sound of the true words expressed.

Therefore with both his arms he took me up,
And when he had me all upon his breast,
Remounted by the way where he descended.

Nor did he tire to have me clasped to him;
But bore me to the summit of the arch
Which from the fourth dike to the fifth is passage.

There tenderly he laid his burden down,
Tenderly on the crag uneven and steep,
That would have been hard passage for the goats:

Thence was unveiled to me another valley.
Of a new pain behoves me to make verses
And give material to the twentieth canto
Of the first song, which is of the submerged.

I was already thoroughly disposed
To peer down into the uncovered depth,
Which bathed itself with tears of agony;

And people saw I through the circular valley,
Silent and weeping, coming at the pace
Which in this world the Litanies assume.

As lower down my sight descended on them,
Wondrously each one seemed to be distorted
From chin to the beginning of the chest;

For tow'rds the reins the countenance was turned,
And backward it behoved them to advance,
As to look forward had been taken from them.

Perchance indeed by violence of palsy
Some one has been thus wholly turned awry;
But I ne'er saw it, nor believe it can be.

As God may let thee, Reader, gather fruit
From this thy reading, think now for thyself
How I could ever keep my face unmoistened,

When our own image near me I beheld
Distorted so, the weeping of the eyes
Along the fissure bathed the hinder parts.

Truly I wept, leaning upon a peak
Of the hard crag, so that my Escort said
To me: Art thou, too, of the other fools?

Here pity lives when it is wholly dead;
Who is a greater reprobate than he
Who feels compassion at the doom divine?

Lift up, lift up thy head, and see for whom
Opened the earth before the Thebans' eyes;
Wherefore they all cried: 'Whither rushest thou,

Amphiaraus?Why dost leave the war?'
And downward ceased he not to fall amain
As far as Minos, who lays hold on all.

See, he has made a bosom of his shoulders!
Because he wished to see too far before him
Behind he looks, and backward goes his way:

Behold Tiresias, who his semblance changed,
When from a male a female he became,
His members being all of them transformed;

And afterwards was forced to strike once more
The two entangled serpents with his rod,
Ere he could have again his manly plumes.

That Aruns is, who backs the other's belly,
Who in the hills of Luni, there where grubs
The Carrarese who houses underneath,

Among the marbles white a cavern had
For his abode; whence to behold the stars
And sea, the view was not cut off from him.

And she there, who is covering up her breasts,
Which thou beholdest not, with loosened tresses,
And on that side has all the hairy skin,

Was Manto, who made quest through many lands,
Afterwards tarried there where I was born;
Whereof I would thou list to me a little.

After her father had from life departed,
And the city of Bacchus had become enslaved,
She a long season wandered through the world.

Above in beauteous Italy lies a lake
At the Alp's foot that shuts in Germany
Over Tyrol, and has the name Benaco.

By a thousand springs, I think, and more, is bathed,
'Twixt Garda and Val Camonica, Pennino,
With water that grows stagnant in that lake.

Midway a place is where the Trentine Pastor,
And he of Brescia, and the Veronese
Might give his blessing, if he passed that way.

Sitteth Peschiera, fortress fair and strong,
To front the Brescians and the Bergamasks,
Where round about the bank descendeth lowest.

There of necessity must fall whatever
In bosom of Benaco cannot stay,
And grows a river down through verdant pastures.

Soon as the water doth begin to run,
No more Benaco is it called, but Mincio,
Far as Governo, where it falls in Po.

Not far it runs before it finds a plain
In which it spreads itself, and makes it marshy,
And oft 'tis wont in summer to be sickly.

Passing that way the virgin pitiless
Land in the middle of the fen descried,
Untilled and naked of inhabitants;

There to escape all human intercourse,
She with her servants stayed, her arts to practise
And lived, and left her empty body there.

The men, thereafter, who were scattered round,
Collected in that place, which was made strong
By the lagoon it had on every side;

They built their city over those dead bones,
And, after her who first the place selected,
Mantua named it, without other omen.

Its people once within more crowded were,
Ere the stupidity of Casalodi
From Pinamonte had received deceit.

Therefore I caution thee, if e'er thou hearest
Originate my city otherwise,
No falsehood may the verity defraud.

And I: My Master, thy discourses are
To me so certain, and so take my faith,
That unto me the rest would be spent coals.

But tell me of the people who are passing,
If any one note-worthy thou beholdest,
For only unto that my mind reverts.

Then said he to me: He who from the cheek
Thrusts out his beard upon his swarthy shoulders
Was, at the time when Greece was void of males,

So that there scarce remained one in the cradle,
An augur, and with Calchas gave the moment,
In Aulis, when to sever the first cable.

Eryphylus his name was, and so sings
My lofty Tragedy in some part or other;
That knowest thou well, who knowest the whole of it.

The next, who is so slender in the flanks,
Was Michael Scott, who of a verity
Of magical illusions knew the game.

Behold Guido Bonatti, behold Asdente,
Who now unto his leather and his thread
Would fain have stuck, but he too late repents.

Behold the wretched ones, who left the needle,
The spool and rock, and made them fortune-tellers;
They wrought their magic spells with herb and image.

But come now, for already holds the confines
Of both the hemispheres, and under Seville
Touches the ocean-wave, Cain and the thorns,

And yesternight the moon was round already;
Thou shouldst remember well it did not harm thee
From time to time within the forest deep.

Thus spake he to me, and we walked the while.
From bridge to bridge thus, speaking other things
Of which my Comedy cares not to sing,
We came along, and held the summit, when

We halted to behold another fissure
Of Malebolge and other vain laments;
And I beheld it marvellously dark.

As in the Arsenal of the Venetians
Boils in the winter the tenacious pitch
To smear their unsound vessels o'er again,

For sail they cannot; and instead thereof
One makes his vessel new, and one recaulks
The ribs of that which many a voyage has made;

One hammers at the prow, one at the stern,
This one makes oars, and that one cordage twists,
Another mends the mainsail and the mizzen;

Thus, not by fire, but by the art divine,
Was boiling down below there a dense pitch
Which upon every side the bank belimed.

I saw it, but I did not see within it
Aught but the bubbles that the boiling raised,
And all swell up and resubside compressed.

The while below there fixedly I gazed,
My Leader, crying out: Beware, beware!
Drew me unto himself from where I stood.

Then I turned round, as one who is impatient
To see what it behoves him to escape,
And whom a sudden terror doth unman,

Who, while he looks, delays not his departure;
And I beheld behind us a black devil,
Running along upon the crag, approach.

Ah, how ferocious was he in his aspect!
And how he seemed to me in action ruthless,
With open wings and light upon his feet!

His shoulders, which sharp-pointed were and high,
A sinner did encumber with both haunches,
And he held clutched the sinews of the feet.

From off our bridge, he said: O Malebranche,
Behold one of the elders of Saint Zita;
Plunge him beneath, for I return for others

Unto that town, which is well furnished with them.
All there are barrators, except Bonturo;
No into Yes for money there is changed.

He hurled him down, and over the hard crag
Turned round, and never was a mastiff loosened
In so much hurry to pursue a thief.

The other sank, and rose again face downward;
But the demons, under cover of the bridge,
Cried: Here the Santo Volto has no place!

Here swims one otherwise than in the Serchio;
Therefore, if for our gaffs thou wishest not,
Do not uplift thyself above the pitch.

They seized him then with more than a hundred rakes;
They said: It here behoves thee to dance covered,
That, if thou canst, thou secretly mayest pilfer.

Not otherwise the cooks their scullions make
Immerse into the middle of the caldron
The meat with hooks, so that it may not float.

Said the good Master to me: That it be not
Apparent thou art here, crouch thyself down
Behind a jag, that thou mayest have some screen;

And for no outrage that is done to me
Be thou afraid, because these things I know,
For once before was I in such a scuffle.

Then he passed on beyond the bridge's head,
And as upon the sixth bank he arrived,
Need was for him to have a steadfast front.

With the same fury, and the same uproar,
As dogs leap out upon a mendicant,
Who on a sudden begs, where'er he stops,

They issued from beneath the little bridge,
And turned against him all their grappling-irons;
But he cried out: Be none of you malignant!

Before those hooks of yours lay hold of me,
Let one of you step forward, who may hear me,
And then take counsel as to grappling me.

They all cried out: Let Malacoda go;
Whereat one started, and the rest stood still,
And he came to him, saying: What avails it?

Thinkest thou, Malacoda, to behold me
Advanced into this place, my Master said,
Safe hitherto from all your skill of fence,

Without the will divine, and fate auspicious?
Let me go on, for it in Heaven is willed
That I another show this savage road.

Then was his arrogance so humbled in him,
That he let fall his grapnel at his feet,
And to the others said: Now strike him not.

And unto me my Guide: O thou, who sittest
Among the splinters of the bridge crouched down,
Securely now return to me again.

Wherefore I started and came swiftly to him;
And all the devils forward thrust themselves,
So that I feared they would not keep their compact.

And thus beheld I once afraid the soldiers
Who issued under safeguard from Caprona,
Seeing themselves among so many foes.

Close did I press myself with all my person
Beside my Leader, and turned not mine eyes
From off their countenance, which was not good.

They lowered their rakes, and Wilt thou have me hit him,
They said to one another, on the rump?
And answered: Yes; see that thou nick him with it.

But the same demon who was holding parley
With my Conductor turned him very quickly,
And said: Be quiet, be quiet, Scarmiglione;

Then said to us: You can no farther go
Forward upon this crag, because is lying
All shattered, at the bottom, the sixth arch.

And if it still doth please you to go onward,
Pursue your way along upon this rock;
Near is another crag that yields a path.

Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,
One thousand and two hundred sixty-six
Years were complete, that here the way was broken.

I send in that direction some of mine
To see if any one doth air himself;
Go ye with them; for they will not be vicious.

Step forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,
Began he to cry out, and thou, Cagnazzo;
And Barbariccia, do thou guide the ten.

Come forward, Libicocco and Draghignazzo,
And tusked Ciriatto and Graffiacane,
And Farfarello and mad Rubicante;

Search ye all round about the boiling pitch;
Let these be safe as far as the next crag,
That all unbroken passes o'er the dens.

O me! what is it, Master, that I see?
Pray let us go, I said, without an escort,
If thou knowest how, since for myself I ask none.

If thou art as observant as thy wont is,
Dost thou not see that they do gnash their teeth,
And with their brows are threatening woe to us?

And he to me: I will not have thee fear;
Let them gnash on, according to their fancy,
Because they do it for those boiling wretches.

Along the left-hand dike they wheeled about;
But first had each one thrust his tongue between
His teeth towards their leader for a signal;

And he had made a trumpet of his rump.
I have erewhile seen horsemen moving camp,
Begin the storming, and their muster make,
And sometimes starting off for their escape;

Vaunt-couriers have I seen upon your land,
O Aretines, and foragers go forth,
Tournaments stricken, and the joustings run,

Sometimes with trumpets and sometimes with bells,
With kettle-drums, and signals of the castles,
And with our own, and with outlandish things,

But never yet with bagpipe so uncouth
Did I see horsemen move, nor infantry,
Nor ship by any sign of land or star.

We went upon our way with the ten demons;
Ah, savage company! but in the church
With saints, and in the tavern with the gluttons!

Ever upon the pitch was my intent,
To see the whole condition of that Bolgia,
And of the people who therein were burned.

Even as the dolphins, when they make a sign
To mariners by arching of the back,
That they should counsel take to save their vessel,

Thus sometimes, to alleviate his pain,
One of the sinners would display his back,
And in less time conceal it than it lightens.

As on the brink of water in a ditch
The frogs stand only with their muzzles out,
So that they hide their feet and other bulk,

So upon every side the sinners stood;
But ever as Barbariccia near them came,
Thus underneath the boiling they withdrew.

I saw, and still my heart doth shudder at it,
One waiting thus, even as it comes to pass
One frog remains, and down another dives;

And Graffiacan, who most confronted him,
Grappled him by his tresses smeared with pitch,
And drew him up, so that he seemed an otter.

I knew, before, the names of all of them,
So had I noted them when they were chosen,
And when they called each other, listened how.

O Rubicante, see that thou do lay
Thy claws upon him, so that thou mayst flay him,
Cried all together the accursed ones.

And I: My Master, see to it, if thou canst,
That thou mayst know who is the luckless wight,
Thus come into his adversaries' hands.

Near to the side of him my Leader drew,
Asked of him whence he was; and he replied:
I in the kingdom of Navarre was born;

My mother placed me servant to a lord,
For she had borne me to a ribald knave,
Destroyer of himself and of his things.

Then I domestic was of good King Thibault;
I set me there to practise barratry,
For which I pay the reckoning in this heat.

And Ciriatto, from whose mouth projected,
On either side, a tusk, as in a boar,
Caused him to feel how one of them could rip.

Among malicious cats the mouse had come;
But Barbariccia clasped him in his arms,
And said: Stand ye aside, while I enfork him.

And to my Master he turned round his head;
Ask him again, he said, if more thou wish
To know from him, before some one destroy him.

The Guide: Now tell then of the other culprits;
Knowest thou any one who is a Latian,
Under the pitch?And he: I separated

Lately from one who was a neighbour to it;
Would that I still were covered up with him,
For I should fear not either claw nor hook!

And Libicocco: We have borne too much;
And with his grapnel seized him by the arm,
So that, by rending, he tore off a tendon.

Eke Draghignazzo wished to pounce upon him
Down at the legs; whence their Decurion
Turned round and round about with evil look.

When they again somewhat were pacified,
Of him, who still was looking at his wound,
Demanded my Conductor without stay:

Who was that one, from whom a luckless parting
Thou sayest thou hast made, to come ashore?
And he replied: It was the Friar Gomita,

He of Gallura, vessel of all fraud,
Who had the enemies of his Lord in hand,
And dealt so with them each exults thereat;

Money he took, and let them smoothly off,
As he says; and in other offices
A barrator was he, not mean but sovereign.

Foregathers with him one Don Michael Zanche
Of Logodoro; and of Sardinia
To gossip never do their tongues feel tired.

O me! see that one, how he grinds his teeth;
Still farther would I speak, but am afraid
Lest he to scratch my itch be making ready.

And the grand Provost, turned to Farfarello,
Who rolled his eyes about as if to strike,
Said: Stand aside there, thou malicious bird.

If you desire either to see or hear,
The terror-stricken recommenced thereon,
Tuscans or Lombards, I will make them come.

But let the Malebranche cease a little,
So that these may not their revenges fear,
And I, down sitting in this very place,

For one that I am will make seven come,
When I shall whistle, as our custom is
To do whenever one of us comes out.

Cagnazzo at these words his muzzle lifted,
Shaking his head, and said: Just hear the trick
Which he has thought of, down to throw himself!

Whence he, who snares in great abundance had,
Responded: I by far too cunning am,
When I procure for mine a greater sadness.

Alichin held not in, but running counter
Unto the rest, said to him: If thou dive,
I will not follow thee upon the gallop,

But I will beat my wings above the pitch;
The height be left, and be the bank a shield
To see if thou alone dost countervail us.

O thou who readest, thou shalt hear new sport!
Each to the other side his eyes averted;
He first, who most reluctant was to do it.

The Navarrese selected well his time;
Planted his feet on land, and in a moment
Leaped, and released himself from their design.

Whereat each one was suddenly stung with shame,
But he most who was cause of the defeat;
Therefore he moved, and cried: Thou art o'ertakern.

But little it availed, for wings could not
Outstrip the fear; the other one went under,
And, flying, upward he his breast directed;

Not otherwise the duck upon a sudden
Dives under, when the falcon is approaching,
And upward he returneth cross and weary.

Infuriate at the mockery, Calcabrina
Flying behind him followed close, desirous
The other should escape, to have a quarrel.

And when the barrator had disappeared,
He turned his talons upon his companion,
And grappled with him right above the moat.

But sooth the other was a doughty sparhawk
To clapperclaw him well; and both of them
Fell in the middle of the boiling pond.

A sudden intercessor was the heat;
But ne'ertheless of rising there was naught,
To such degree they had their wings belimed.

Lamenting with the others, Barbariccia
Made four of them fly to the other side
With all their gaffs, and very speedily

This side and that they to their posts descended;
They stretched their hooks towards the pitch-ensnared,
Who were already baked within the crust,

And in this manner busied did we leave them.
Silent, alone, and without company
We went, the one in front, the other after,
As go the Minor Friars along their way.

Upon the fable of Aesop was directed
My thought, by reason of the present quarrel,
Where he has spoken of the frog and mouse;

For 'mo' and 'issa' are not more alike
Than this one is to that, if well we couple
End and beginning with a steadfast mind.

And even as one thought from another springs,
So afterward from that was born another,
Which the first fear within me double made.

Thus did I ponder: These on our account
Are laughed to scorn, with injury and scoff
So great, that much I think it must annoy them.

If anger be engrafted on ill-will,
They will come after us more merciless
Than dog upon the leveret which he seizes,

I felt my hair stand all on end already
With terror, and stood backwardly intent,
When said I: Master, if thou hidest not

Thyself and me forthwith, of Malebranche
I am in dread; we have them now behind us;
I so imagine them, I already feel them.

And he: If I were made of leaded glass,
Thine outward image I should not attract
Sooner to me than I imprint the inner.

Just now thy thoughts came in among my own,
With similar attitude and similar face,
So that of both one counsel sole I made.

If peradventure the right bank so slope
That we to the next Bolgia can descend,
We shall escape from the imagined chase.

Not yet he finished rendering such opinion,
When I beheld them come with outstretched wings,
Not far remote, with will to seize upon us.

My Leader on a sudden seized me up,
Even as a mother who by noise is wakened,
And close beside her sees the enkindled flames,

Who takes her son, and flies, and does not stop,
Having more care of him than of herself,
So that she clothes her only with a shift;

And downward from the top of the hard bank
Supine he gave him to the pendent rock,
That one side of the other Bolgia walls.

Ne'er ran so swiftly water through a sluice
To turn the wheel of any land-built mill,
When nearest to the paddles it approaches,

As did my Master down along that border,
Bearing me with him on his breast away,
As his own son, and not as a companion.

Hardly the bed of the ravine below
His feet had reached, ere they had reached the hill
Right over us; but he was not afraid;

For the high Providence, which had ordained
To place them ministers of the fifth moat,
The power of thence departing took from all.

A painted people there below we found,
Who went about with footsteps very slow,
Weeping and in their semblance tired and vanquished.

They had on mantles with the hoods low down
Before their eyes, and fashioned of the cut
That in Cologne they for the monks are made.

Without, they gilded are so that it dazzles;
But inwardly all leaden and so heavy
That Frederick used to put them on of straw.

O everlastingly fatiguing mantle!
Again we turned us, still to the left hand
Along with them, intent on their sad plaint;

But owing to the weight, that weary folk
Came on so tardily, that we were new
In company at each motion of the haunch.

Whence I unto my Leader: See thou find
Some one who may by deed or name be known,
And thus in going move thine eye about.

And one, who understood the Tuscan speech,
Cried to us from behind: Stay ye your feet,
Ye, who so run athwart the dusky air!

Perhaps thou'lt have from me what thou demandest.
Whereat the Leader turned him, and said: Wait,
And then according to his pace proceed.

I stopped, and two beheld I show great haste
Of spirit, in their faces, to be with me;
But the burden and the narrow way delayed them.

When they came up, long with an eye askance
They scanned me without uttering a word.
Then to each other turned, and said together:

He by the action of his throat seems living;
And if they dead are, by what privilege
Go they uncovered by the heavy stole?

Then said to me: Tuscan, who to the college
Of miserable hypocrites art come,
Do not disdain to tell us who thou art.

And I to them: Born was I, and grew up
In the great town on the fair river of Arno,
And with the body am I've always had.

But who are ye, in whom there trickles down
Along your cheeks such grief as I behold?
And what pain is upon you, that so sparkles?

And one replied to me: These orange cloaks
Are made of lead so heavy, that the weights
Cause in this way their balances to creak.

Frati Gaudenti were we, and Bolognese;
I Catalano, and he Loderingo
Named, and together taken by thy city,

As the wont is to take one man alone,
For maintenance of its peace; and we were such
That still it is apparent round Gardingo.

O Friars, began I, your iniquitous. . .
But said no more; for to mine eyes there rushed
One crucified with three stakes on the ground.

When me he saw, he writhed himself all over,
Blowing into his beard with suspirations;
And the Friar Catalan, who noticed this,

Said to me: This transfixed one, whom thou seest,
Counselled the Pharisees that it was meet
To put one man to torture for the people.

Crosswise and naked is he on the path,
As thou perceivest; and he needs must feel,
Whoever passes, first how much he weighs;

And in like mode his father-in-law is punished
Within this moat, and the others of the council,
Which for the Jews was a malignant seed.

And thereupon I saw Virgilius marvel
O'er him who was extended on the cross
So vilely in eternal banishment.

Then he directed to the Friar this voice:
Be not displeased, if granted thee, to tell us
If to the right hand any pass slope down

By which we two may issue forth from here,
Without constraining some of the black angels
To come and extricate us from this deep.

Then he made answer: Nearer than thou hopest
There is a rock, that forth from the great circle
Proceeds, and crosses all the cruel valleys,

Save that at this 'tis broken, and does not bridge it;
You will be able to mount up the ruin,
That sidelong slopes and at the bottom rises.

The Leader stood awhile with head bowed down;
Then said: The business badly he recounted
Who grapples with his hook the sinners yonder.

And the Friar: Many of the Devil's vices
Once heard I at Bologna, and among them,
That he's a liar and the father of lies.

Thereat my Leader with great strides went on,
Somewhat disturbed with anger in his looks;
Whence from the heavy-laden I departed

After the prints of his beloved feet.
In that part of the youthful year wherein
The Sun his locks beneath Aquarius tempers,
And now the nights draw near to half the day,

What time the hoar-frost copies on the ground
The outward semblance of her sister white,
But little lasts the temper of her pen,

The husbandman, whose forage faileth him,
Rises, and looks, and seeth the champaign
All gleaming white, whereat he beats his flank,

Returns in doors, and up and down laments,
Like a poor wretch, who knows not what to do;
Then he returns and hope revives again,

Seeing the world has changed its countenance
In little time, and takes his shepherd's crook,
And forth the little lambs to pasture drives.

Thus did the Master fill me with alarm,
When I beheld his forehead so disturbed,
And to the ailment came as soon the plaster.

For as we came unto the ruined bridge,
The Leader turned to me with that sweet look
Which at the mountain's foot I first beheld.

His arms he opened, after some advisement
Within himself elected, looking first
Well at the ruin, and laid hold of me.

And even as he who acts and meditates,
For aye it seems that he provides beforehand,
So upward lifting me towards the summit

Of a huge rock, he scanned another crag,
Saying: To that one grapple afterwards,
But try first if 'tis such that it will hold thee.

This was no way for one clothed with a cloak;
For hardly we, he light, and I pushed upward,
Were able to ascend from jag to jag.

And had it not been, that upon that precinct
Shorter was the ascent than on the other,
He I know not, but I had been dead beat.

But because Malebolge tow'rds the mouth
Of the profoundest well is all inclining,
The structure of each valley doth import

That one bank rises and the other sinks.
Still we arrived at length upon the point
Wherefrom the last stone breaks itself asunder.

The breath was from my lungs so milked away,
When I was up, that I could go no farther,
Nay, I sat down upon my first arrival.

Now it behoves thee thus to put off sloth,
My Master said; for sitting upon down,
Or under quilt, one cometh not to fame,

Withouten which whoso his life consumes
Such vestige leaveth of himself on earth,
As smoke in air or in the water foam.

And therefore raise thee up, o'ercome the anguish
With spirit that o'ercometh every battle,
If with its heavy body it sink not.

A longer stairway it behoves thee mount;
'Tis not enough from these to have departed;
Let it avail thee, if thou understand me.

Then I uprose, showing myself provided
Better with breath than I did feel myself,
And said: Go on, for I am strong and bold.

Upward we took our way along the crag,
Which jagged was, and narrow, and difficult,
And more precipitous far than that before.

Speaking I went, not to appear exhausted;
Whereat a voice from the next moat came forth,
Not well adapted to articulate words.

I know not what it said, though o'er the back
I now was of the arch that passes there;
But he seemed moved to anger who was speaking.

I was bent downward, but my living eyes
Could not attain the bottom, for the dark;
Wherefore I: Master, see that thou arrive

At the next round, and let us descend the wall;
For as from hence I hear and understand not,
So I look down and nothing I distinguish.

Other response, he said, I make thee not,
Except the doing; for the modest asking
Ought to be followed by the deed in silence.

We from the bridge descended at its head,
Where it connects itself with the eighth bank,
And then was manifest to me the Bolgia;

And I beheld therein a terrible throng
Of serpents, and of such a monstrous kind,
That the remembrance still congeals my blood

Let Libya boast no longer with her sand;
For if Chelydri, Jaculi, and Phareae
She breeds, with Cenchri and with Amphisbaena,

Neither so many plagues nor so malignant
E'er showed she with all Ethiopia,
Nor with whatever on the Red Sea is!

Among this cruel and most dismal throng
People were running naked and affrighted.
Without the hope of hole or heliotrope.

They had their hands with serpents bound behind them;
These riveted upon their reins the tail
And head, and were in front of them entwined.

And lo! at one who was upon our side
There darted forth a serpent, which transfixed him
There where the neck is knotted to the shoulders.

Nor 'O' so quickly e'er, nor 'I' was written,
As he took fire, and burned; and ashes wholly
Behoved it that in falling he became.

And when he on the ground was thus destroyed,
The ashes drew together, and of themselves
Into himself they instantly returned.

Even thus by the great sages 'tis confessed
The phoenix dies, and then is born again,
When it approaches its five-hundredth year;

On herb or grain it feeds not in its life,
But only on tears of incense and amomum,
And nard and myrrh are its last winding-sheet.

And as he is who falls, and knows not how,
By force of demons who to earth down drag him,
Or other oppilation that binds man,

When he arises and around him looks,
Wholly bewildered by the mighty anguish
Which he has suffered, and in looking sighs;

Such was that sinner after he had risen.
Justice of God! O how severe it is,
That blows like these in vengeance poureth down!

The Guide thereafter asked him who he was;
Whence he replied: I rained from Tuscany
A short time since into this cruel gorge.

A bestial life, and not a human, pleased me,
Even as the mule I was; I'm Vanni Fucci,
Beast, and Pistoia was my worthy den.

And I unto the Guide: Tell him to stir not,
And ask what crime has thrust him here below,
For once a man of blood and wrath I saw him.

And the sinner, who had heard, dissembled not,
But unto me directed mind and face,
And with a melancholy shame was painted.

Then said: It pains me more that thou hast caught me
Amid this misery where thou seest me,
Than when I from the other life was taken.

What thou demandest I cannot deny;
So low am I put down because I robbed
The sacristy of the fair ornaments,

And falsely once 'twas laid upon another;
But that thou mayst not such a sight enjoy,
If thou shalt e'er be out of the dark places,

Thine ears to my announcement ope and hear:
Pistoia first of Neri groweth meagre;
Then Florence doth renew her men and manners;

Mars draws a vapour up from Val di Magra,
Which is with turbid clouds enveloped round,
And with impetuous and bitter tempest

Over Campo Picen shall be the battle;
When it shall suddenly rend the mist asunder,
So that each Bianco shall thereby be smitten.

And this I've said that it may give thee pain.
At the conclusion of his words, the thief
Lifted his hands aloft with both the figs,
Crying: Take that, God, for at thee I aim them.

From that time forth the serpents were my friends;
For one entwined itself about his neck
As if it said: I will not thou speak more;

And round his arms another, and rebound him,
Clinching itself together so in front,
That with them he could not a motion make.

Pistoia, ah, Pistoia! why resolve not
To burn thyself to ashes and so perish,
Since in ill-doing thou thy seed excellest?

Through all the sombre circles of this Hell,
Spirit I saw not against God so proud,
Not he who fell at Thebes down from the walls!

He fled away, and spake no further word;
And I beheld a Centaur full of rage
Come crying out: Where is, where is the scoffer?

I do not think Maremma has so many
Serpents as he had all along his back,
As far as where our countenance begins.

Upon the shoulders, just behind the nape,
With wings wide open was a dragon lying,
And he sets fire to all that he encounters.

My Master said: That one is Cacus, who
Beneath the rock upon Mount Aventine
Created oftentimes a lake of blood.

He goes not on the same road with his brothers,
By reason of the fraudulent theft he made
Of the great herd, which he had near to him;

Whereat his tortuous actions ceased beneath
The mace of Hercules, who peradventure
Gave him a hundred, and he felt not ten.

While he was speaking thus, he had passed by,
And spirits three had underneath us come,
Of which nor I aware was, nor my Leader,

Until what time they shouted: Who are you?
On which account our story made a halt,
And then we were intent on them alone.

I did not know them; but it came to pass,
As it is wont to happen by some chance,
That one to name the other was compelled,

Exclaiming: Where can Cianfa have remained?
Whence I, so that the Leader might attend,
Upward from chin to nose my finger laid.

If thou art, Reader, slow now to believe
What I shall say, it will no marvel be,
For I who saw it hardly can admit it.

As I was holding raised on them my brows,
Behold! a serpent with six feet darts forth
In front of one, and fastens wholly on him.

With middle feet it bound him round the paunch,
And with the forward ones his arms it seized;
Then thrust its teeth through one cheek and the other;

The hindermost it stretched upon his thighs,
And put its tail through in between the two,
And up behind along the reins outspread it.

Ivy was never fastened by its barbs
Unto a tree so, as this horrible reptile
Upon the other's limbs entwined its own.

Then they stuck close, as if of heated wax
They had been made, and intermixed their colour;
Nor one nor other seemed now what he was;

E'en as proceedeth on before the flame
Upward along the paper a brown colour,
Which is not black as yet, and the white dies.

The other two looked on, and each of them
Cried out: O me, Agnello, how thou changest!
Behold, thou now art neither two nor one.

Already the two heads had one become,
When there appeared to us two figures mingled
Into one face, wherein the two were lost.

Of the four lists were fashioned the two arms,
The thighs and legs, the belly and the chest
Members became that never yet were seen.

Every original aspect there was cancelled;
Two and yet none did the perverted image
Appear, and such departed with slow pace.

Even as a lizard, under the great scourge
Of days canicular, exchanging hedge,
Lightning appeareth if the road it cross;

Thus did appear, coming towards the bellies
Of the two others, a small fiery serpent,
Livid and black as is a peppercorn.

And in that part whereat is first received
Our aliment, it one of them transfixed;
Then downward fell in front of him extended.

The one transfixed looked at it, but said naught;
Nay, rather with feet motionless he yawned,
Just as if sleep or fever had assailed him.

He at the serpent gazed, and it at him;
One through the wound, the other through the mouth
Smoked violently, and the smoke commingled.

Henceforth be silent Lucan, where he mentions
Wretched Sabellus and Nassidius,
And wait to hear what now shall be shot forth.

Be silent Ovid, of Cadmus and Arethusa;
For if him to a snake, her to fountain,
Converts he fabling, that I grudge him not;

Because two natures never front to front
Has he transmuted, so that both the forms
To interchange their matter ready were.

Together they responded in such wise,
That to a fork the serpent cleft his tail,
And eke the wounded drew his feet together.

The legs together with the thighs themselves
Adhered so, that in little time the juncture
No sign whatever made that was apparent.

He with the cloven tail assumed the figure
The other one was losing, and his skin
Became elastic, and the other's hard.

I saw the arms draw inward at the armpits,
And both feet of the reptile, that were short,
Lengthen as much as those contracted were.

Thereafter the hind feet, together twisted,
Became the member that a man conceals,
And of his own the wretch had two created.

While both of them the exhalation veils
With a new colour, and engenders hair
On one of them and depilates the other,

The one uprose and down the other fell,
Though turning not away their impious lamps,
Underneath which each one his muzzle changed.

He who was standing drew it tow'rds the temples,
And from excess of matter, which came thither,
Issued the ears from out the hollow cheeks;

What did not backward run and was retained
Of that excess made to the face a nose,
And the lips thickened far as was befitting.

He who lay prostrate thrusts his muzzle forward,
And backward draws the ears into his head,
In the same manner as the snail its horns;

And so the tongue, which was entire and apt
For speech before, is cleft, and the bi-forked
In the other closes up, and the smoke ceases.

The soul, which to a reptile had been changed,
Along the valley hissing takes to flight,
And after him the other speaking sputters.

Then did he turn upon him his new shoulders,
And said to the other: I'll have Buoso run,
Crawling as I have done, along this road.

In this way I beheld the seventh ballast
Shift and reshift, and here be my excuse
The novelty, if aught my pen transgress.

And notwithstanding that mine eyes might be
Somewhat bewildered, and my mind dismayed,
They could not flee away so secretly

But that I plainly saw Puccio Sciancato;
And he it was who sole of three companions,
Which came in the beginning, was not changed;

The other was he whom thou, Gaville, weepest.
Rejoice, O Florence, since thou art so great,
That over sea and land thou beatest thy wings,
And throughout Hell thy name is spread abroad!

Among the thieves five citizens of thine
Like these I found, whence shame comes unto me,
And thou thereby to no great honour risest.

But if when morn is near our dreams are true,
Feel shalt thou in a little time from now
What Prato, if none other, craves for thee.

And if it now were, it were not too soon;
Would that it were, seeing it needs must be,
For 'twill aggrieve me more the more I age.

We went our way, and up along the stairs
The bourns had made us to descend before,
Remounted my Conductor and drew me.

And following the solitary path
Among the rocks and ridges of the crag,
The foot without the hand sped not at all.

Then sorrowed I, and sorrow now again,
When I direct my mind to what I saw,
And more my genius curb than I am wont,

That it may run not unless virtue guide it;
So that if some good star, or better thing,
Have given me good, I may myself not grudge it.

As many as the hind (who on the hill
Rests at the time when he who lights the world
His countenance keeps least concealed from us,

While as the fly gives place unto the gnat)
Seeth the glow-worms down along the valley,
Perchance there where he ploughs and makes his vintage;

With flames as manifold resplendent all
Was the eighth Bolgia, as I grew aware
As soon as I was where the depth appeared.

And such as he who with the bears avenged him
Beheld Elijah's chariot at departing,
What time the steeds to heaven erect uprose,

For with his eye he could not follow it
So as to see aught else than flame alone,
Even as a little cloud ascending upward,

Thus each along the gorge of the intrenchment
Was moving; for not one reveals the theft,
And every flame a sinner steals away.

I stood upon the bridge uprisen to see,
So that, if I had seized not on a rock,
Down had I fallen without being pushed.

And the Leader, who beheld me so attent,
Exclaimed: Within the fires the spirits are;
Each swathes himself with that wherewith he burns.

My Master, I replied, by hearing thee
I am more sure; but I surmised already
It might be so, and already wished to ask thee

Who is within that fire, which comes so cleft
At top, it seems uprising from the pyre
Where was Eteocles with his brother placed.

He answered me: Within there are tormented
Ulysses and Diomed, and thus together
They unto vengeance run as unto wrath.

And there within their flame do they lament
The ambush of the horse, which made the door
Whence issued forth the Romans' gentle seed;

Therein is wept the craft, for which being dead
Deidamia still deplores Achilles,
And pain for the Palladium there is borne.

If they within those sparks possess the power
To speak, I said, thee, Master, much I pray,
And re-pray, that the prayer be worth a thousand,

That thou make no denial of awaiting
Until the horned flame shall hither come;
Thou seest that with desire I lean towards it.

And he to me: Worthy is thy entreaty
Of much applause, and therefore I accept it;
But take heed that thy tongue restrain itself.

Leave me to speak, because I have conceived
That which thou wishest; for they might disdain
Perchance, since they were Greeks, discourse of thine.

When now the flame had come unto that point,
Where to my Leader it seemed time and place,
After this fashion did I hear him speak:

O ye, who are twofold within one fire,
If I deserved of you, while I was living,
If I deserved of you or much or little

When in the world I wrote the lofty verses,
Do not move on, but one of you declare
Whither, being lost, he went away to die.

Then of the antique flame the greater horn,
Murmuring, began to wave itself about
Even as a flame doth which the wind fatigues.

Thereafterward, the summit to and fro
Moving as if it were the tongue that spake,
It uttered forth a voice, and said: When I

From Circe had departed, who concealed me
More than a year there near unto Gaeta,
Or ever yet Aeneas named it so,

Nor fondness for my son, nor reverence
For my old father, nor the due affection
Which joyous should have made Penelope,

Could overcome within me the desire
I had to be experienced of the world,
And of the vice and virtue of mankind;

But I put forth on the high open sea
With one sole ship, and that small company
By which I never had deserted been.

Both of the shores I saw as far as Spain,
Far as Morocco, and the isle of Sardes,
And the others which that sea bathes round about.

I and my company were old and slow
When at that narrow passage we arrived
Where Hercules his landmarks set as signals,

That man no farther onward should adventure.
On the right hand behind me left I Seville,
And on the other already had left Ceuta.

'O brothers, who amid a hundred thousand
Perils,' I said, 'have come unto the West,
To this so inconsiderable vigil

Which is remaining of your senses still
Be ye unwilling to deny the knowledge,
Following the sun, of the unpeopled world.

Consider ye the seed from which ye sprang;
Ye were not made to live like unto brutes,
But for pursuit of virtue and of knowledge.'

So eager did I render my companions,
With this brief exhortation, for the voyage,
That then I hardly could have held them back.

And having turned our stern unto the morning,
We of the oars made wings for our mad flight,
Evermore gaining on the larboard side.

Already all the stars of the other pole
The night beheld, and ours so very low
It did not rise above the ocean floor.

Five times rekindled and as many quenched
Had been the splendour underneath the moon,
Since we had entered into the deep pass,

When there appeared to us a mountain, dim
From distance, and it seemed to me so high
As I had never any one beheld.

Joyful were we, and soon it turned to weeping;
For out of the new land a whirlwind rose,
And smote upon the fore part of the ship.

Three times it made her whirl with all the waters,
At the fourth time it made the stern uplift,
And the prow downward go, as pleased Another,

Until the sea above us closed again.
Already was the flame erect and quiet,
To speak no more, and now departed from us
With the permission of the gentle Poet;

When yet another, which behind it came,
Caused us to turn our eyes upon its top
By a confused sound that issued from it.

As the Sicilian bull (that bellowed first
With the lament of him, and that was right,
Who with his file had modulated it)

Bellowed so with the voice of the afflicted,
That, notwithstanding it was made of brass,
Still it appeared with agony transfixed;

Thus, by not having any way or issue
At first from out the fire, to its own language
Converted were the melancholy words.

But afterwards, when they had gathered way
Up through the point, giving it that vibration
The tongue had given them in their passage out,

We heard it said: O thou, at whom I aim
My voice, and who but now wast speaking Lombard,
Saying, 'Now go thy way, no more I urge thee,'

Because I come perchance a little late,
To stay and speak with me let it not irk thee;
Thou seest it irks not me, and I am burning.

If thou but lately into this blind world
Hast fallen down from that sweet Latian land,
Wherefrom I bring the whole of my transgression,

Say, if the Romagnuols have peace or war,
For I was from the mountains there between
Urbino and the yoke whence Tiber bursts.

I still was downward bent and listening,
When my Conductor touched me on the side,
Saying: Speak thou: this one a Latian is.

And I, who had beforehand my reply
In readiness, forthwith began to speak:
O soul, that down below there art concealed,

Romagna thine is not and never has been
Without war in the bosom of its tyrants;
But open war I none have left there now.

Ravenna stands as it long years has stood;
The Eagle of Polenta there is brooding,
So that she covers Cervia with her vans.

The city which once made the long resistance,
And of the French a sanguinary heap,
Beneath the Green Paws finds itself again;

Verrucchio's ancient Mastiff and the new,
Who made such bad disposal of Montagna,
Where they are wont make wimbles of their teeth.

The cities of Lamone and Santerno
Governs the Lioncel of the white lair,
Who changes sides 'twixt summer-time and winter;

And that of which the Savio bathes the flank,
Even as it lies between the plain and mountain,
Lives between tyranny and a free state.

Now I entreat thee tell us who thou art;
Be not more stubborn than the rest have been,
So may thy name hold front there in the world.

After the fire a little more had roared
In its own fashion, the sharp point it moved
This way and that, and then gave forth such breath:

If I believed that my reply were made
To one who to the world would e'er return,
This flame without more flickering would stand still;

But inasmuch as never from this depth
Did any one return, if I hear true,
Without the fear of infamy I answer,

I was a man of arms, then Cordelier,
Believing thus begirt to make amends;
And truly my belief had been fulfilled

But for the High Priest, whom may ill betide,
Who put me back into my former sins;
And how and wherefore I will have thee hear.

While I was still the form of bone and pulp
My mother gave to me, the deeds I did
Were not those of a lion, but a fox.

The machinations and the covert ways
I knew them all, and practised so their craft,
That to the ends of earth the sound went forth.

When now unto that portion of mine age
I saw myself arrived, when each one ought
To lower the sails, and coil away the ropes,

That which before had pleased me then displeased me;
And penitent and confessing I surrendered,
Ah woe is me! and it would have bestead me;

The Leader of the modern Pharisees
Having a war near unto Lateran,
And not with Saracens nor with the Jews,

For each one of his enemies was Christian,
And none of them had been to conquer Acre,
Nor merchandising in the Sultan's land,

Nor the high office, nor the sacred orders,
In him regarded, nor in me that cord
Which used to make those girt with it more meagre;

But even as Constantine sought out Sylvester
To cure his leprosy, within Soracte,
So this one sought me out as an adept

To cure him of the fever of his pride.
Counsel he asked of me, and I was silent,
Because his words appeared inebriate.

And then he said: 'Be not thy heart afraid;
Henceforth I thee absolve; and thou instruct me
How to raze Palestrina to the ground.

Heaven have I power to lock and to unlock,
As thou dost know; therefore the keys are two,
The which my predecessor held not dear.'

Then urged me on his weighty arguments
There, where my silence was the worst advice;
And said I: 'Father, since thou washest me

Of that sin into which I now must fall,
The promise long with the fulfilment short
Will make thee triumph in thy lofty seat.'

Francis came afterward, when I was dead,
For me; but one of the black Cherubim
Said to him: 'Take him not; do me no wrong;

He must come down among my servitors,
Because he gave the fraudulent advice
From which time forth I have been at his hair;

For who repents not cannot be absolved,
Nor can one both repent and will at once,
Because of the contradiction which consents not.'

O miserable me! how I did shudder
When he seized on me, saying: 'Peradventure
Thou didst not think that I was a logician!'

He bore me unto Minos, who entwined
Eight times his tail about his stubborn back,
And after he had bitten it in great rage,

Said: 'Of the thievish fire a culprit this;'
Wherefore, here where thou seest, am I lost,
And vested thus in going I bemoan me.

When it had thus completed its recital,
The flame departed uttering lamentations,
Writhing and flapping its sharp-pointed horn.

Onward we passed, both I and my Conductor,
Up o'er the crag above another arch,
Which the moat covers, where is paid the fee

By those who, sowing discord, win their burden.
Who ever could, e'en with untrammelled words,
Tell of the blood and of the wounds in full
Which now I saw, by many times narrating?

Each tongue would for a certainty fall short
By reason of our speech and memory,
That have small room to comprehend so much.

If were again assembled all the people
Which formerly upon the fateful land
Of Puglia were lamenting for their blood

Shed by the Romans and the lingering war
That of the rings made such illustrious spoils,
As Livy has recorded, who errs not,

With those who felt the agony of blows
By making counterstand to Robert Guiscard,
And all the rest, whose bones are gathered still

At Ceperano, where a renegade
Was each Apulian, and at Tagliacozzo,
Where without arms the old Alardo conquered,

And one his limb transpierced, and one lopped off,
Should show, it would be nothing to compare
With the disgusting mode of the ninth Bolgia.

A cask by losing centre-piece or cant
Was never shattered so, as I saw one
Rent from the chin to where one breaketh wind.

Between his legs were hanging down his entrails;
His heart was visible, and the dismal sack
That maketh excrement of what is eaten.

While I was all absorbed in seeing him,
He looked at me, and opened with his hands
His bosom, saying: See now how I rend me;

How mutilated, see, is Mahomet;
In front of me doth Ali weeping go,
Cleft in the face from forelock unto chin;

And all the others whom thou here beholdest,
Disseminators of scandal and of schism
While living were, and therefore are cleft thus.

A devil is behind here, who doth cleave us
Thus cruelly, unto the falchion's edge
Putting again each one of all this ream,

When we have gone around the doleful road;
By reason that our wounds are closed again
Ere any one in front of him repass.

But who art thou, that musest on the crag,
Perchance to postpone going to the pain
That is adjudged upon thine accusations?

Nor death hath reached him yet, nor guilt doth bring him,
My Master made reply, to be tormented;
But to procure him full experience,

Me, who am dead, behoves it to conduct him
Down here through Hell, from circle unto circle;
And this is true as that I speak to thee.

More than a hundred were there when they heard him,
Who in the moat stood still to look at me,
Through wonderment oblivious of their torture.

Now say to Fra Dolcino, then, to arm him,
Thou, who perhaps wilt shortly see the sun,
If soon he wish not here to follow me,

So with provisions, that no stress of snow
May give the victory to the Novarese,
Which otherwise to gain would not be easy.

After one foot to go away he lifted,
This word did Mahomet say unto me,
Then to depart upon the ground he stretched it.

Another one, who had his throat pierced through,
And nose cut off close underneath the brows,
And had no longer but a single ear,

Staying to look in wonder with the others,
Before the others did his gullet open,
Which outwardly was red in every part,

And said: O thou, whom guilt doth not condemn,
And whom I once saw up in Latian land,
Unless too great similitude deceive me,

Call to remembrance Pier da Medicina,
If e'er thou see again the lovely plain
That from Vercelli slopes to Marcabo,

And make it known to the best two of Fano,
To Messer Guido and Angiolello likewise,
That if foreseeing here be not in vain,

Cast over from their vessel shall they be,
And drowned near unto the Cattolica,
By the betrayal of a tyrant fell.

Between the isles of Cyprus and Majorca
Neptune ne'er yet beheld so great a crime,
Neither of pirates nor Argolic people.

That traitor, who sees only with one eye,
And holds the land, which some one here with me
Would fain be fasting from the vision of,

Will make them come unto a parley with him;
Then will do so, that to Focara's wind
They will not stand in need of vow or prayer.

And I to him: Show to me and declare,
If thou wouldst have me bear up news of thee,
Who is this person of the bitter vision.

Then did he lay his hand upon the jaw
Of one of his companions, and his mouth
Oped, crying: This is he, and he speaks not.

This one, being banished, every doubt submerged
In Caesar by affirming the forearmed
Always with detriment allowed delay.

O how bewildered unto me appeared,
With tongue asunder in his windpipe slit,
Curio, who in speaking was so bold!

And one, who both his hands dissevered had,
The stumps uplifting through the murky air,
So that the blood made horrible his face,

Cried out: Thou shalt remember Mosca also,
Who said, alas! 'A thing done has an end!'
Which was an ill seed for the Tuscan people.

And death unto thy race, thereto I added;
Whence he, accumulating woe on woe,
Departed, like a person sad and crazed.

But I remained to look upon the crowd;
And saw a thing which I should be afraid,
Without some further proof, even to recount,

If it were not that conscience reassures me,
That good companion which emboldens man
Beneath the hauberk of its feeling pure.

I truly saw, and still I seem to see it,
A trunk without a head walk in like manner
As walked the others of the mournful herd.

And by the hair it held the head dissevered,
Hung from the hand in fashion of a lantern,
And that upon us gazed and said: O me!

It of itself made to itself a lamp,
And they were two in one, and one in two;
How that can be, He knows who so ordains it.

When it was come close to the bridge's foot,
It lifted high its arm with all the head,
To bring more closely unto us its words,

Which were: Behold now the sore penalty,
Thou, who dost breathing go the dead beholding;
Behold if any be as great as this.

And so that thou may carry news of me,
Know that Bertram de Born am I, the same
Who gave to the Young King the evil comfort.

I made the father and the son rebellious;
Achitophel not more with Absalom
And David did with his accursed goadings.

Because I parted persons so united,
Parted do I now bear my brain, alas!
From its beginning, which is in this trunk.

Thus is observed in me the counterpoise.
The many people and the divers wounds
These eyes of mine had so inebriated,
That they were wishful to stand still and weep;

But said Virgilius: What dost thou still gaze at?
Why is thy sight still riveted down there
Among the mournful, mutilated shades?

Thou hast not done so at the other Bolge;
Consider, if to count them thou believest,
That two-and-twenty miles the valley winds,

And now the moon is underneath our feet;
Henceforth the time allotted us is brief,
And more is to be seen than what thou seest.

If thou hadst, I made answer thereupon,
Attended to the cause for which I looked,
Perhaps a longer stay thou wouldst have pardoned.

Meanwhile my Guide departed, and behind him
I went, already making my reply,
And superadding: In that cavern where

I held mine eyes with such attention fixed,
I think a spirit of my blood laments
The sin which down below there costs so much.

Then said the Master: Be no longer broken
Thy thought from this time forward upon him;
Attend elsewhere, and there let him remain;

For him I saw below the little bridge,
Pointing at thee, and threatening with his finger
Fiercely, and heard him called Geri del Bello.

So wholly at that time wast thou impeded
By him who formerly held Altaforte,
Thou didst not look that way; so he departed.

O my Conductor, his own violent death,
Which is not yet avenged for him, I said,
By any who is sharer in the shame,

Made him disdainful; whence he went away,
As I imagine, without speaking to me,
And thereby made me pity him the more.

Thus did we speak as far as the first place
Upon the crag, which the next valley shows
Down to the bottom, if there were more light.

When we were now right over the last cloister
Of Malebolge, so that its lay-brothers
Could manifest themselves unto our sight,

Divers lamentings pierced me through and through,
Which with compassion had their arrows barbed,
Whereat mine ears I covered with my hands.

What pain would be, if from the hospitals
Of Valdichiana, 'twixt July and September,
And of Maremma and Sardinia

All the diseases in one moat were gathered,
Such was it here, and such a stench came from it
As from putrescent limbs is wont to issue.

We had descended on the furthest bank
From the long crag, upon the left hand still,
And then more vivid was my power of sight

Down tow'rds the bottom, where the ministress
Of the high Lord, Justice infallible,
Punishes forgers, which she here records.

I do not think a sadder sight to see
Was in Aegina the whole people sick,
(When was the air so full of pestilence,

The animals, down to the little worm,
All fell, and afterwards the ancient people,
According as the poets have affirmed,

Were from the seed of ants restored again,)
Than was it to behold through that dark valley
The spirits languishing in divers heaps.

This on the belly, that upon the back
One of the other lay, and others crawling
Shifted themselves along the dismal road.

We step by step went onward without speech,
Gazing upon and listening to the sick
Who had not strength enough to lift their bodies.

I saw two sitting leaned against each other,
As leans in heating platter against platter,
From head to foot bespotted o'er with scabs;

And never saw I plied a currycomb
By stable-boy for whom his master waits,
Or him who keeps awake unwillingly,

As every one was plying fast the bite
Of nails upon himself, for the great rage
Of itching which no other succour had.

And the nails downward with them dragged the scab,
In fashion as a knife the scales of bream,
Or any other fish that has them largest.

O thou, that with thy fingers dost dismail thee,
Began my Leader unto one of them,
And makest of them pincers now and then,

Tell me if any Latian is with those
Who are herein; so may thy nails suffice thee
To all eternity unto this work.

Latians are we, whom thou so wasted seest,
Both of us here, one weeping made reply;
But who art thou, that questionest about us?

And said the Guide: One am I who descends
Down with this living man from cliff to cliff,
And I intend to show Hell unto him.

Then broken was their mutual support,
And trembling each one turned himself to me,
With others who had heard him by rebound.

Wholly to me did the good Master gather,
Saying: Say unto them whate'er thou wishest.
And I began, since he would have it so:

So may your memory not steal away
In the first world from out the minds of men,
But so may it survive 'neath many suns,

Say to me who ye are, and of what people;
Let not your foul and loathsome punishment
Make you afraid to show yourselves to me.

I of Arezzo was, one made reply,
And Albert of Siena had me burned;
But what I died for does not bring me here.

'Tis true I said to him, speaking in jest,
That I could rise by flight into the air,
And he who had conceit, but little wit,

Would have me show to him the art; and only
Because no Daedalus I made him, made me
Be burned by one who held him as his son.

But unto the last Bolgia of the ten,
For alchemy, which in the world I practised,
Minos, who cannot err, has me condemned.

And to the Poet said I: Now was ever
So vain a people as the Sienese?
Not for a certainty the French by far.

Whereat the other leper, who had heard me,
Replied unto my speech: Taking out Stricca,
Who knew the art of moderate expenses,

And Niccolo, who the luxurious use
Of cloves discovered earliest of all
Within that garden where such seed takes root;

And taking out the band, among whom squandered
Caccia d'Ascian his vineyards and vast woods,
And where his wit the Abbagliato proffered!

But, that thou know who thus doth second thee
Against the Sienese, make sharp thine eye
Tow'rds me, so that my face well answer thee,

And thou shalt see I am Capocchio's shade,
Who metals falsified by alchemy;
Thou must remember, if I well descry thee,

How I a skilful ape of nature was.
'Twas at the time when Juno was enraged,
For Semele, against the Theban blood,
As she already more than once had shown,

So reft of reason Athamas became,
That, seeing his own wife with children twain
Walking encumbered upon either hand,

He cried: Spread out the nets, that I may take
The lioness and her whelps upon the passage;
And then extended his unpitying claws,

Seizing the first, who had the name Learchus,
And whirled him round, and dashed him on a rock;
And she, with the other burthen, drowned herself;--

And at the time when fortune downward hurled
The Trojan's arrogance, that all things dared,
So that the king was with his kingdom crushed,

Hecuba sad, disconsolate, and captive,
When lifeless she beheld Polyxena,
And of her Polydorus on the shore

Of ocean was the dolorous one aware,
Out of her senses like a dog she barked,
So much the anguish had her mind distorted;

But not of Thebes the furies nor the Trojan
Were ever seen in any one so cruel
In goading beasts, and much more human members,

As I beheld two shadows pale and naked,
Who, biting, in the manner ran along
That a boar does, when from the sty turned loose.

One to Capocchio came, and by the nape
Seized with its teeth his neck, so that in dragging
It made his belly grate the solid bottom.

And the Aretine, who trembling had remained,
Said to me: That mad sprite is Gianni Schicchi,
And raving goes thus harrying other people.

O, said I to him, so may not the other
Set teeth on thee, let it not weary thee
To tell us who it is, ere it dart hence.

And he to me: That is the ancient ghost
Of the nefarious Myrrha, who became
Beyond all rightful love her father's lover.

She came to sin with him after this manner,
By counterfeiting of another's form;
As he who goeth yonder undertook,

That he might gain the lady of the herd,
To counterfeit in himself Buoso Donati,
Making a will and giving it due form.

And after the two maniacs had passed
On whom I held mine eye, I turned it back
To look upon the other evil-born.

I saw one made in fashion of a lute,
If he had only had the groin cut off
Just at the point at which a man is forked.

The heavy dropsy, that so disproportions
The limbs with humours, which it ill concocts,
That the face corresponds not to the belly,

Compelled him so to hold his lips apart
As does the hectic, who because of thirst
One tow'rds the chin, the other upward turns.

O ye, who without any torment are,
And why I know not, in the world of woe,
He said to us, behold, and be attentive

Unto the misery of Master Adam;
I had while living much of what I wished,
And now, alas! a drop of water crave.

The rivulets, that from the verdant hills
Of Cassentin descend down into Arno,
Making their channels to be cold and moist,

Ever before me stand, and not in vain;
For far more doth their image dry me up
Than the disease which strips my face of flesh.

The rigid justice that chastises me
Draweth occasion from the place in which
I sinned, to put the more my sighs in flight.

There is Romena, where I counterfeited
The currency imprinted with the Baptist,
For which I left my body burned above.

But if I here could see the tristful soul
Of Guido, or Alessandro, or their brother,
For Branda's fount I would not give the sight.

One is within already, if the raving
Shades that are going round about speak truth;
But what avails it me, whose limbs are tied?

If I were only still so light, that in
A hundred years I could advance one inch,
I had already started on the way,

Seeking him out among this squalid folk,
Although the circuit be eleven miles,
And be not less than half a mile across.

For them am I in such a family;
They did induce me into coining florins,
Which had three carats of impurity.

And I to him: Who are the two poor wretches
That smoke like unto a wet hand in winter,
Lying there close upon thy right-hand confines?

I found them here, replied he, when I rained
Into this chasm, and since they have not turned,
Nor do I think they will for evermore.

One the false woman is who accused Joseph,
The other the false Sinon, Greek of Troy;
From acute fever they send forth such reek.

And one of them, who felt himself annoyed
At being, peradventure, named so darkly,
Smote with the fist upon his hardened paunch.

It gave a sound, as if it were a drum;
And Master Adam smote him in the face,
With arm that did not seem to be less hard,

Saying to him: Although be taken from me
All motion, for my limbs that heavy are,
I have an arm unfettered for such need.

Whereat he answer made: When thou didst go
Unto the fire, thou hadst it not so ready:
But hadst it so and more when thou wast coining.

The dropsical: Thou sayest true in that;
But thou wast not so true a witness there,
Where thou wast questioned of the truth at Troy.

If I spake false, thou falsifiedst the coin,
Said Sinon; and for one fault I am here,
And thou for more than any other demon.

Remember, perjurer, about the horse,
He made reply who had the swollen belly,
And rueful be it thee the whole world knows it.

Rueful to thee the thirst be wherewith cracks
Thy tongue, the Greek said, and the putrid water
That hedges so thy paunch before thine eyes.

Then the false-coiner: So is gaping wide
Thy mouth for speaking evil, as 'tis wont;
Because if I have thirst, and humour stuff me

Thou hast the burning and the head that aches,
And to lick up the mirror of Narcissus
Thou wouldst not want words many to invite thee.

In listening to them was I wholly fixed,
When said the Master to me: Now just look,
For little wants it that I quarrel with thee.

When him I heard in anger speak to me,
I turned me round towards him with such shame
That still it eddies through my memory.

And as he is who dreams of his own harm,
Who dreaming wishes it may be a dream,
So that he craves what is, as if it were not;

Such I became, not having power to speak,
For to excuse myself I wished, and still
Excused myself, and did not think I did it.

Less shame doth wash away a greater fault,
The Master said, than this of thine has been;
Therefore thyself disburden of all sadness,

And make account that I am aye beside thee,
If e'er it come to pass that fortune bring thee
Where there are people in a like dispute;

For a base wish it is to wish to hear it.
One and the selfsame tongue first wounded me,
So that it tinged the one cheek and the other,
And then held out to me the medicine;

Thus do I hear that once Achilles' spear,
His and his father's, used to be the cause
First of a sad and then a gracious boon.

We turned our backs upon the wretched valley,
Upon the bank that girds it round about,
Going across it without any speech.

There it was less than night, and less than day,
So that my sight went little in advance;
But I could hear the blare of a loud horn,

So loud it would have made each thunder faint,
Which, counter to it following its way,
Mine eyes directed wholly to one place.

After the dolorous discomfiture
When Charlemagne the holy emprise lost,
So terribly Orlando sounded not.

Short while my head turned thitherward I held
When many lofty towers I seemed to see,
Whereat I: Master, say, what town is this?

And he to me: Because thou peerest forth
Athwart the darkness at too great a distance,
It happens that thou errest in thy fancy.

Well shalt thou see, if thou arrivest there,
How much the sense deceives itself by distance;
Therefore a little faster spur thee on.

Then tenderly he took me by the hand,
And said: Before we farther have advanced,
That the reality may seem to thee

Less strange, know that these are not towers, but giants,
And they are in the well, around the bank,
From navel downward, one and all of them.

As, when the fog is vanishing away,
Little by little doth the sight refigure
Whate'er the mist that crowds the air conceals,

So, piercing through the dense and darksome air,
More and more near approaching tow'rd the verge,
My error fled, and fear came over me;

Because as on its circular parapets
Montereggione crowns itself with towers,
E'en thus the margin which surrounds the well

With one half of their bodies turreted
The horrible giants, whom Jove menaces
E'en now from out the heavens when he thunders.

And I of one already saw the face,
Shoulders, and breast, and great part of the belly,
And down along his sides both of the arms.

Certainly Nature, when she left the making
Of animals like these, did well indeed,
By taking such executors from Mars;

And if of elephants and whales she doth not
Repent her, whosoever looketh subtly
More just and more discreet will hold her for it;

For where the argument of intellect
Is added unto evil will and power,
No rampart can the people make against it.

His face appeared to me as long and large
As is at Rome the pine-cone of Saint Peter's,
And in proportion were the other bones;

So that the margin, which an apron was
Down from the middle, showed so much of him
Above it, that to reach up to his hair

Three Frieslanders in vain had vaunted them;
For I beheld thirty great palms of him
Down from the place where man his mantle buckles.

Raphael mai amech izabi almi,
Began to clamour the ferocious mouth,
To which were not befitting sweeter psalms.

And unto him my Guide: Soul idiotic,
Keep to thy horn, and vent thyself with that,
When wrath or other passion touches thee.

Search round thy neck, and thou wilt find the belt
Which keeps it fastened, O bewildered soul,
And see it, where it bars thy mighty breast.

Then said to me: He doth himself accuse;
This one is Nimrod, by whose evil thought
One language in the world is not still used.

Here let us leave him and not speak in vain;
For even such to him is every language
As his to others, which to none is known.

Therefore a longer journey did we make,
Turned to the left, and a crossbow-shot oft
We found another far more fierce and large.

In binding him, who might the master be
I cannot say; but he had pinioned close
Behind the right arm, and in front the other,

With chains, that held him so begirt about
From the neck down, that on the part uncovered
It wound itself as far as the fifth gyre.

This proud one wished to make experiment
Of his own power against the Supreme Jove,
My Leader said, whence he has such a guerdon.

Ephialtes is his name; he showed great prowess.
What time the giants terrified the gods;
The arms he wielded never more he moves.

And I to him: If possible, I should wish
That of the measureless Briareus
These eyes of mine might have experience.

Whence he replied: Thou shalt behold Antaeus
Close by here, who can speak and is unbound,
Who at the bottom of all crime shall place us.

Much farther yon is he whom thou wouldst see,
And he is bound, and fashioned like to this one,
Save that he seems in aspect more ferocious.

There never was an earthquake of such might
That it could shake a tower so violently,
As Ephialtes suddenly shook himself.

Then was I more afraid of death than ever,
For nothing more was needful than the fear,
If I had not beheld the manacles.

Then we proceeded farther in advance,
And to Antaeus came, who, full five ells
Without the head, forth issued from the cavern.

O thou, who in the valley fortunate,
Which Scipio the heir of glory made,
When Hannibal turned back with all his hosts,

Once brought'st a thousand lions for thy prey,
And who, hadst thou been at the mighty war
Among thy brothers, some it seems still think

The sons of Earth the victory would have gained:
Place us below, nor be disdainful of it,
There where the cold doth lock Cocytus up.

Make us not go to Tityus nor Typhoeus;
This one can give of that which here is longed for;
Therefore stoop down, and do not curl thy lip.

Still in the world can he restore thy fame;
Because he lives, and still expects long life,
If to itself Grace call him not untimely.

So said the Master; and in haste the other
His hands extended and took up my Guide,--
Hands whose great pressure Hercules once felt.

Virgilius, when he felt himself embraced,
Said unto me: Draw nigh, that I may take thee;
Then of himself and me one bundle made.

As seems the Carisenda, to behold
Beneath the leaning side, when goes a cloud
Above it so that opposite it hangs;

Such did Antaeus seem to me, who stood
Watching to see him stoop, and then it was
I could have wished to go some other way.

But lightly in the abyss, which swallows up
Judas with Lucifer, he put us down;
Nor thus bowed downward made he there delay,

But, as a mast does in a ship, uprose.
If I had rhymes both rough and stridulous,
As were appropriate to the dismal hole
Down upon which thrust all the other rocks,

I would press out the juice of my conception
More fully; but because I have them not,
Not without fear I bring myself to speak;

For 'tis no enterprise to take in jest,
To sketch the bottom of all the universe,
Nor for a tongue that cries Mamma and Babbo.

But may those Ladies help this verse of mine,
Who helped Amphion in enclosing Thebes,
That from the fact the word be not diverse.

O rabble ill-begotten above all,
Who're in the place to speak of which is hard,
'Twere better ye had here been sheep or goats!

When we were down within the darksome well,
Beneath the giant's feet, but lower far,
And I was scanning still the lofty wall,

I heard it said to me: Look how thou steppest!
Take heed thou do not trample with thy feet
The heads of the tired, miserable brothers!

Whereat I turned me round, and saw before me
And underfoot a lake, that from the frost
The semblance had of glass, and not of water.

So thick a veil ne'er made upon its current
In winter-time Danube in Austria,
Nor there beneath the frigid sky the Don,

As there was here; so that if Tambernich
Had fallen upon it, or Pietrapana,
E'en at the edge 'twould not have given a creak.

And as to croak the frog doth place himself
With muzzle out of water,--when is dreaming
Of gleaning oftentimes the peasant-girl,--

Livid, as far down as where shame appears,
Were the disconsolate shades within the ice,
Setting their teeth unto the note of storks.

Each one his countenance held downward bent;
From mouth the cold, from eyes the doleful heart
Among them witness of itself procures.

When round about me somewhat I had looked,
I downward turned me, and saw two so close,
The hair upon their heads together mingled.

Ye who so strain your breasts together, tell me,
I said, who are you; and they bent their necks,
And when to me their faces they had lifted,

Their eyes, which first were only moist within,
Gushed o'er the eyelids, and the frost congealed
The tears between, and locked them up again.

Clamp never bound together wood with wood
So strongly; whereat they, like two he-goats,
Butted together, so much wrath o'ercame them.

And one, who had by reason of the cold
Lost both his ears, still with his visage downward,
Said: Why dost thou so mirror thyself in us?

If thou desire to know who these two are,
The valley whence Bisenzio descends
Belonged to them and to their father Albert.

They from one body came, and all Caina
Thou shalt search through, and shalt not find a shade
More worthy to be fixed in gelatine;

Not he in whom were broken breast and shadow
At one and the same blow by Arthur's hand;
Focaccia not; not he who me encumbers

So with his head I see no farther forward,
And bore the name of Sassol Mascheroni;
Well knowest thou who he was, if thou art Tuscan.

And that thou put me not to further speech,
Know that I Camicion de' Pazzi was,
And wait Carlino to exonerate me.

Then I beheld a thousand faces, made
Purple with cold; whence o'er me comes a shudder,
And evermore will come, at frozen ponds.

And while we were advancing tow'rds the middle,
Where everything of weight unites together,
And I was shivering in the eternal shade,

Whether 'twere will, or destiny, or chance,
I know not; but in walking 'mong the heads
I struck my foot hard in the face of one.

Weeping he growled: Why dost thou trample me?
Unless thou comest to increase the vengeance
of Montaperti, why dost thou molest me?

And I: My Master, now wait here for me,
That I through him may issue from a doubt;
Then thou mayst hurry me, as thou shalt wish.

The Leader stopped; and to that one I said
Who was blaspheming vehemently still:
Who art thou, that thus reprehendest others?

Now who art thou, that goest through Antenora
Smiting, replied he, other people's cheeks,
So that, if thou wert living, 'twere too much?

Living I am, and dear to thee it may be,
Was my response, if thou demandest fame,
That 'mid the other notes thy name I place.

And he to me: For the reverse I long;
Take thyself hence, and give me no more trouble;
For ill thou knowest to flatter in this hollow.

Then by the scalp behind I seized upon him,
And said: It must needs be thou name thyself,
Or not a hair remain upon thee here.

Whence he to me: Though thou strip off my hair,
I will not tell thee who I am, nor show thee,
If on my head a thousand times thou fall.

I had his hair in hand already twisted,
And more than one shock of it had pulled out,
He barking, with his eyes held firmly down,

When cried another: What doth ail thee, Bocca?
Is't not enough to clatter with thy jaws,
But thou must bark? what devil touches thee?

Now, said I, I care not to have thee speak,
Accursed traitor; for unto thy shame
I will report of thee veracious news.

Begone, replied he, and tell what thou wilt,
But be not silent, if thou issue hence,
Of him who had just now his tongue so prompt;

He weepeth here the silver of the French;
'I saw,' thus canst thou phrase it, 'him of Duera
There where the sinners stand out in the cold.'

If thou shouldst questioned be who else was there,
Thou hast beside thee him of Beccaria,
Of whom the gorget Florence slit asunder;

Gianni del Soldanier, I think, may be
Yonder with Ganellon, and Tebaldello
Who oped Faenza when the people slep.

Already we had gone away from him,
When I beheld two frozen in one hole,
So that one head a hood was to the other;

And even as bread through hunger is devoured,
The uppermost on the other set his teeth,
There where the brain is to the nape united.

Not in another fashion Tydeus gnawed
The temples of Menalippus in disdain,
Than that one did the skull and the other things.

O thou, who showest by such bestial sign
Thy hatred against him whom thou art eating,
Tell me the wherefore, said I, with this compact,

That if thou rightfully of him complain,
In knowing who ye are, and his transgression,
I in the world above repay thee for it,

If that wherewith I speak be not dried up.
His mouth uplifted from his grim repast,
That sinner, wiping it upon the hair
Of the same head that he behind had wasted.

Then he began: Thou wilt that I renew
The desperate grief, which wrings my heart already
To think of only, ere I speak of it;

But if my words be seed that may bear fruit
Of infamy to the traitor whom I gnaw,
Speaking and weeping shalt thou see together.

I know not who thou art, nor by what mode
Thou hast come down here; but a Florentine
Thou seemest to me truly, when I hear thee.

Thou hast to know I was Count Ugolino,
And this one was Ruggieri the Archbishop;
Now I will tell thee why I am such a neighbour.

That, by effect of his malicious thoughts,
Trusting in him I was made prisoner,
And after put to death, I need not say;

 But ne'ertheless what thou canst not have heard,
That is to say, how cruel was my death,
Hear shalt thou, and shalt know if he has wronged me.

A narrow perforation in the mew,
Which bears because of me the title of Famine,
And in which others still must be locked up,

Had shown me through its opening many moons
Already, when I dreamed the evil dream
Which of the future rent for me the veil.

This one appeared to me as lord and master,
Hunting the wolf and whelps upon the mountain
For which the Pisans cannot Lucca see.

With sleuth-hounds gaunt, and eager, and well trained,
Gualandi with Sismondi and Lanfianchi
He had sent out before him to the front.

After brief course seemed unto me forespent
The father and the sons, and with sharp tushes
It seemed to me I saw their flanks ripped open.

When I before the morrow was awake,
Moaning amid their sleep I heard my sons
Who with me were, and asking after bread.

Cruel indeed art thou, if yet thou grieve not,
Thinking of what my heart foreboded me,
And weep'st thou not, what art thou wont to weep at?

They were awake now, and the hour drew nigh
At which our food used to be brought to us,
And through his dream was each one apprehensive;

And I heard locking up the under door
Of the horrible tower; whereat without a word
I gazed into the faces of my sons.

I wept not, I within so turned to stone;
They wept; and darling little Anselm mine
Said: 'Thou dost gaze so, father, what doth ail thee?'

Still not a tear I shed, nor answer made
All of that day, nor yet the night thereafter,
Until another sun rose on the world.

As now a little glimmer made its way
Into the dolorous prison, and I saw
Upon four faces my own very aspect,

Both of my hands in agony I bit;
And, thinking that I did it from desire
Of eating, on a sudden they uprose,

And said they: 'Father, much less pain 'twill give us
If thou do eat of us; thyself didst clothe us
With this poor flesh, and do thou strip it off.'

I calmed me then, not to make them more sad.
That day we all were silent, and the next.
Ah! obdurate earth, wherefore didst thou not open?

When we had come unto the fourth day, Gaddo
Threw himself down outstretched before my feet,
Saying, 'My father, why dost thou not help me?'

And there he died; and, as thou seest me,
I saw the three fall, one by one, between
The fifth day and the sixth; whence I betook me,

Already blind, to groping over each,
And three days called them after they were dead;
Then hunger did what sorrow could not do.

When he had said this, with his eyes distorted,
The wretched skull resumed he with his teeth,
Which, as a dog's, upon the bone were strong.

Ah! Pisa, thou opprobrium of the people
Of the fair land there where the 'Si' doth sound,
Since slow to punish thee thy neighbours are,

Let the Capraia and Gorgona move,
And make a hedge across the mouth of Arno
That every person in thee it may drown!

For if Count Ugolino had the fame
Of having in thy castles thee betrayed,
Thou shouldst not on such cross have put his sons.

Guiltless of any crime, thou modern Thebes!
Their youth made Uguccione and Brigata,
And the other two my song doth name above!

We passed still farther onward, where the ice
Another people ruggedly enswathes,
Not downward turned, but all of them reversed.

Weeping itself there does not let them weep,
And grief that finds a barrier in the eyes
Turns itself inward to increase the anguish;

Because the earliest tears a cluster form,
And, in the manner of a crystal visor,
Fill all the cup beneath the eyebrow full.

And notwithstanding that, as in a callus,
Because of cold all sensibility
Its station had abandoned in my face,

Still it appeared to me I felt some wind;
Whence I: My Master, who sets this in motion?
Is not below here every vapour quenched?

Whence he to me: Full soon shalt thou be where
Thine eye shall answer make to thee of this,
Seeing the cause which raineth down the blast.

And one of the wretches of the frozen crust
Cried out to us: O souls so merciless
That the last post is given unto you,

Lift from mine eyes the rigid veils, that I
May vent the sorrow which impregns my heart
A little, e'er the weeping recongeal.

Whence I to him: If thou wouldst have me help thee
Say who thou wast; and if I free thee not,
May I go to the bottom of the ice.

Then he replied: I am Friar Alberigo;
He am I of the fruit of the bad garden,
Who here a date am getting for my fig.

O, said I to him, now art thou, too, dead?
And he to me: How may my body fare
Up in the world, no knowledge I possess.

Such an advantage has this Ptolomaea,
That oftentimes the soul descendeth here
Sooner than Atropos in motion sets it.

And, that thou mayest more willingly remove
From off my countenance these glassy tears,
Know that as soon as any soul betrays

As I have done, his body by a demon
Is taken from him, who thereafter rules it,
Until his time has wholly been revolved.

Itself down rushes into such a cistern;
And still perchance above appears the body
Of yonder shade, that winters here behind me.

This thou shouldst know, if thou hast just come down;
It is Ser Branca d' Oria, and many years
Have passed away since he was thus locked up.

I think, said I to him, thou dost deceive me;
For Branca d' Oria is not dead as yet,
And eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and puts on clothes.

In moat above, said he, of Malebranche,
There where is boiling the tenacious pitch,
As yet had Michel Zanche not arrived,

When this one left a devil in his stead
In his own body and one near of kin,
Who made together with him the betrayal.

But hitherward stretch out thy hand forthwith,
Open mine eyes;--and open them I did not,
And to be rude to him was courtesy.

Ah, Genoese! ye men at variance
With every virtue, full of every vice
Wherefore are ye not scattered from the world?

For with the vilest spirit of Romagna
I found of you one such, who for his deeds
In soul already in Cocytus bathes,

And still above in body seems alive!
'Vexilla Regis prodeunt Inferni'
Towards us; therefore look in front of thee,
My Master said, if thou discernest him.

As, when there breathes a heavy fog, or when
Our hemisphere is darkening into night,
Appears far off a mill the wind is turning,

Methought that such a building then I saw;
And, for the wind, I drew myself behind
My Guide, because there was no other shelter.

Now was I, and with fear in verse I put it,
There where the shades were wholly covered up,
And glimmered through like unto straws in glass.

Some prone are lying, others stand erect,
This with the head, and that one with the soles;
Another, bow-like, face to feet inverts.

When in advance so far we had proceeded,
That it my Master pleased to show to me
The creature who once had the beauteous semblance,

He from before me moved and made me stop,
Saying: Behold Dis, and behold the place
Where thou with fortitude must arm thyself.

How frozen I became and powerless then,
Ask it not, Reader, for I write it not,
Because all language would be insufficient.

I did not die, and I alive remained not;
Think for thyself now, hast thou aught of wit,
What I became, being of both deprived.

The Emperor of the kingdom dolorous
From his mid-breast forth issued from the ice;
And better with a giant I compare

Than do the giants with those arms of his;
Consider now how great must be that whole,
Which unto such a part conforms itself.

Were he as fair once, as he now is foul,
And lifted up his brow against his Maker,
Well may proceed from him all tribulation.

O, what a marvel it appeared to me,
When I beheld three faces on his head!
The one in front, and that vermilion was;

Two were the others, that were joined with this
Above the middle part of either shoulder,
And they were joined together at the crest;

And the right-hand one seemed 'twixt white and yellow;
The left was such to look upon as those
Who come from where the Nile falls valley-ward.

Underneath each came forth two mighty wings,
Such as befitting were so great a bird;
Sails of the sea I never saw so large.

 No feathers had they, but as of a bat
Their fashion was; and he was waving them,
So that three winds proceeded forth therefrom.

Thereby Cocytus wholly was congealed.
With six eyes did he weep, and down three chins
Trickled the tear-drops and the bloody drivel.

At every mouth he with his teeth was crunching
A sinner, in the manner of a brake,
So that he three of them tormented thus.

To him in front the biting was as naught
Unto the clawing, for sometimes the spine
Utterly stripped of all the skin remained.

That soul up there which has the greatest pain,
The Master said, is Judas Iscariot;
With head inside, he plies his legs without.

Of the two others, who head downward are,
The one who hangs from the black jowl is Brutus;
See how he writhes himself, and speaks no word.

And the other, who so stalwart seems, is Cassius.
But night is reascending, and 'tis time
That we depart, for we have seen the whole.

As seemed him good, I clasped him round the neck,
And he the vantage seized of time and place,
And when the wings were opened wide apart,

He laid fast hold upon the shaggy sides;
From fell to fell descended downward then
Between the thick hair and the frozen crust.

When we were come to where the thigh revolves
Exactly on the thickness of the haunch,
The Guide, with labour and with hard-drawn breath,

Turned round his head where he had had his legs,
And grappled to the hair, as one who mounts,
So that to Hell I thought we were returning.

Keep fast thy hold, for by such stairs as these,
The Master said, panting as one fatigued,
Must we perforce depart from so much evil.

Then through the opening of a rock he issued,
And down upon the margin seated me;
Then tow'rds me he outstretched his wary step.

I lifted up mine eyes and thought to see
Lucifer in the same way I had left him;
And I beheld him upward hold his legs.

And if I then became disquieted,
Let stolid people think who do not see
What the point is beyond which I had passed.

Rise up, the Master said, upon thy feet;
The way is long, and difficult the road,
And now the sun to middle-tierce returns.

It was not any palace corridor
There where we were, but dungeon natural,
With floor uneven and unease of light.

Ere from the abyss I tear myself away,
My Master, said I when I had arisen,
To draw me from an error speak a little;

Where is the ice? and how is this one fixed
Thus upside down? and how in such short time
From eve to morn has the sun made his transit?

And he to me: Thou still imaginest
Thou art beyond the centre, where I grasped
The hair of the fell worm, who mines the world.

That side thou wast, so long as I descended;
When round I turned me, thou didst pass the point
To which things heavy draw from every side,

And now beneath the hemisphere art come
Opposite that which overhangs the vast
Dry-land, and 'neath whose cope was put to death

The Man who without sin was born and lived.
Thou hast thy feet upon the little sphere
Which makes the other face of the Judecca.

Here it is morn when it is evening there;
And he who with his hair a stairway made us
Still fixed remaineth as he was before.

Upon this side he fell down out of heaven;
And all the land, that whilom here emerged,
For fear of him made of the sea a veil,

And came to our hemisphere; and peradventure
To flee from him, what on this side appears
Left the place vacant here, and back recoiled.

A place there is below, from Beelzebub
As far receding as the tomb extends,
Which not by sight is known, but by the sound

Of a small rivulet, that there descendeth
Through chasm within the stone, which it has gnawed
With course that winds about and slightly falls.

The Guide and I into that hidden road
Now entered, to return to the bright world;
And without care of having any rest

We mounted up, he first and I the second,
Till I beheld through a round aperture
Some of the beauteous things that Heaven doth bear;

Thence we came forth to rebehold the stars.